# Using Fratar

Fratar distribution is the process of modifying a matrix of
values based upon a set of production and attraction factors for each of the
zones in the matrix. The process is a relatively simple iterative one:

In the first iteration, each row in the matrix is factored
according to its production factor. At the end of the iteration, the row totals
will match the target row values, but the column totals will most likely not
match their targets.

In the second iteration each column in the modified matrix
is factored according its attraction factor. At then end of the iteration, the
column totals will match the target column values, but the row totals may not
match their targets.

This process continues for some number of iterations; the
row and column totals should converge towards the target totals. When the
criteria for convergence is met, the process is complete.

A complete convergence (target row and column totals
obtained for all zones) can be obtained only if the target grand control totals
for rows and columns are the same. The program makes adjustments to guarantee
that the target grand totals do match. It is possible that the user input
values and specifications can preclude obtaining matching totals. In such
cases, the program will fatally terminate.

This section discusses:

- [Specifying target values](GUID-124851A4-866A-48D8-8F3A-D0F2DD2D4530.html#GUID-124851A4-866A-48D8-8F3A-D0F2DD2D4530__SPECIFYINGTARGETVALUES)
- [Controlling target totals](GUID-124851A4-866A-48D8-8F3A-D0F2DD2D4530.html#GUID-124851A4-866A-48D8-8F3A-D0F2DD2D4530__CONTROLLINGTARGETTOTALS)
- [Convergence — Iteration control](GUID-124851A4-866A-48D8-8F3A-D0F2DD2D4530.html#GUID-124851A4-866A-48D8-8F3A-D0F2DD2D4530__CONVERGENCE)
- [Multiple purposes](GUID-124851A4-866A-48D8-8F3A-D0F2DD2D4530.html#GUID-124851A4-866A-48D8-8F3A-D0F2DD2D4530__MULTIPLEPURPOSES)

Specifying target
values

There are several typical ways in which the control totals
can be specified: direct values, growth factors (explicit and implicit), or
some combination of both. All specifications are via the SETPA control
statements. An array of production values (Ps) and an array of attraction
values (As) are maintained for each purpose. To simplify this description, the
term "value" will be used to mean either direct values or growth factors. There
must be a set of production values and attraction values for each matrix to be
factored. They are input to the program via P, A, PGF, and AGF expressions. If
direct values are to be input, the P and A expressions are used. If growth
factors are to be input, the PGF and AGF expressions are used. Direct values
and growth factors can be mixed for a purpose, but a complete understanding of
the SETPA statement is necessary.

Each of the keyword expressions is computed for an array of
values for all zones. P[1] = ZI.1.HBWP2000 would cause the program to simulate
the expression:

```
JLOOP J=1,ZONES
     P[1][J] = ZI.1.HBWP2000[J] . 
ENDJLOOP
```

Similarly, A[]=, PGF[]=, and AGF[]= expressions are
computed for corresponding arrays. To provide the capability of mixing P and
PGF for a purpose, the SETPA statement may include the basic INCLUDE and
EXCLUDE filter specifications. If either, or both, of these filters are
specified on a SETPA statement, they apply to all expressions on that
statement. To specify P and PGF for the same purpose, separate SETPA statements
are used; each would have its own zonal filter set. If the sets overlap, the
latest SETPA values replace any prior values. If the final value for a P or A
is 0, the program revises it to a growth factor of 1.0.

Example 1

```
SETPA P[1]=ZI.1.HBWP2000, A[1]=ZI.1.HBWA2000 INCLUDE=1-500
SETPA PGF[1]=ZI.2.EXTW/2 AGF[1]=PGF[1] INCLUDE=501-550
```

In this example, the values for zones 1-500 would be the
direct values obtained directly from the ZI.1.HBWP2000 array, and the values
for zones 501-550 would be the growth factors obtained from the ZI.2.EXTW array
(divided by 2).

In most cases the values will be obtained from ZDATI (zonal
data) files, or LOOKUP functions, but that is not an absolute requirement.
Standard numerical expressions (J being the only viable variable that could be
included) are used to compute the values. Sometimes, it is desirable to input
specific values.

Example 2

```
SETPA P[1]=5000 INCLUDE=255 ;input a specific value
SETPA A[1]=sqrt(J/2+25**3.5) ;would be possible, but weird.
```

A special feature of these expressions is that if the
result is less than zero, it is not stored. After all SETPA P,A,PGF, and AGF
expressions are processed, the program performs a zonal (I) loop, obtaining the
matrix values for each purpose. The matrices are obtained by solving the SETPA
MW[]= expressions. Again, the INCLUDE and EXCLUDE filters are employed, but
care must be exercised, if they are specified. The MW expressions are array
notation, but applied for each I zone. Therefore the filters will apply to both
the I and J zones.

Example 3

```
SETPA MW[1]=... INCLUDE=1-500
; will compute only the I=1-500 to J=1-500 portion of the matrix.
```

Controlling target
totals

After processing the input matrix, the target totals for
any growth factor values can be fully determined (value = gf \* input). Next,
the program adjusts the values to insure that the P and A totals match for each
purpose. There are several options for adjustment; they are specified by the
use of the CONTROL keywords on the SETPA statement. There may be a CONTROL
specification for each purpose, and if the CONTROL for any purpose is specified
more than one time, the latest value prevails. If no CONTROL is specified it
defaults to PA. The valid values for CONTROL are: P, A, PA, PL, AL, and PAL.

The meanings are:

- P - The P totals control; all values in the A array
  will be factored so that the A totals will match the P totals.
- A - The A totals control; all values in the P array will
  be factored so that the P totals will match the A totals.
- PA - All values in both the P and A arrays will be
  factored so that their totals will match the average of the initial totals.

Sometimes only certain zones are to be modified, and the
remainder of the zones are to be kept constant. The program keeps track of the
zones that are eligible for modification by noting which zones have target
values that differ from the input value by more than one. If the letter "L" is
appended to any of the CONTROL values, it indicates that the modifications are
Limited to only the zones that have change. Use of the this feature can, in
some cases, lead to a situation where a matrix grand total can not be properly
computed. If that is the case, the program will fatally terminate.

- PL - The P totals control. The changed zones in the A
  array will be factored so that the final A total will match the P total.
- AL - The A totals control. The changed zones in the P
  array will be factored so that the final P total will match the A total.
- PAL - The values in P array for zones that have P
  changes, and the values in the A array for zones that have A changes will be
  factored in such a manner that the final P and A totals match the average of
  the initial P and A totals.

It is impossible to modify any cell, column, or row of the
input matrix that has zero to begin with. If a target value is specified for a
zone that initially had no total, a warning message is issued. Traditionally,
some modelers would scale a matrix by a value (usually 10, or 100), and then
fill in all empty cells with one. This is not necessarily a good, or bad,
solution. But, because of the potential problems associated with this approach,
zero accountability is not included in this program directly. If the scaling
scheme is to be applied, a prior application of the Matrix program can be used
to scale and fill in a matrix in any desired manner. It could also be achieved
by setting the SETPA MW expression to: max(1,mi.n.n\*10).

Convergence — Iteration
control

A concern is when to stop the iterating process; there are
several ways to control it. The user can specify a maximum number of
iterations, so that no matter how the convergence is progressing, the process
will not exceed that number. After each iteration, the program computes an RMS
error value based upon the integer differences between the computed and target
row or column totals. After odd iterations, column total differences are
checked, and after even iterations, row differences are checked. If the RMSE
value is less than the MAXRMSE parameter value, the solution is achieved.

It is believed that this process will eventually reach
convergence. But if, due to some unforeseen conditions, the RMSE value begins
to oscillate, the program detects the oscillation, and terminates the process
at the minimum RMSE. If there are multiple matrices being factored, they may
reach optimum solutions at different times. If this happens, the "solved"
matrices are held steady, and the others continue to be processed.

A small example of this process:

As dictated by row factoring, the row totals are correct.
But, the column totals do not quite match the target. Another iteration is
performed, and the results appear as:

The column totals are now on target, but the row totals are
not quite on target.

This process goes on, back and forth, until either the RMSE
drops to the MAXRMSE level, or the number of iterations reaches the MAXITERS
value. In this example, the final solution is reached after 5 iterations
(MAXRMSE=0.01 and MAXITERS=10).

All values are shown to the nearest integer and thus may not
total exactly. Internally, the values are carried with more precision.

Mulitple
Purposes

The number of purposes is determined by the highest P, A,
PGF, AGF, or MW index found on any SETPA control statement. The program assumes
that there will be purposes from one, monotonically, through that highest
index. (FRATAR allows up to 20 trip purposes.) The distribution is performed
prior to entering the main Matrix program I-loop. When the main I-loop is
processed, MW[1] through MW[highest purpose] are initialized with the final
matrices from the Fratar distribution. After the factoring process is complete,
a standard Matrix program I-loop is performed.

**Parent topic:** [Fratar](GUID-E86B3B7E-3499-4ED4-B428-F5A044BC30AE.html)

|
|  |
|
|  |
