# Design concepts

CUBE Voyager is designed to be an integrated modeling system
for transportation planning applications. At the heart of the CUBE Voyager
system is a flexible control language referred to as a scripting language. This
provides a flexible environment and grants control over all aspects of the
modeling process.

The CUBE Voyager system has four main assignment programs:
Network,
Matrix,
Highway, and
Public Transport. In addition, the system offers
supplementary programs for common transportation planning tasks, such as the
Generation program for trip generation and the
Distribution program for trip distribution. These
supplementary programs provide an easy-to-use interface to the basic four
programs. Users may implement any model formulation desired in the scripting
language.

CUBE Voyager has no hard coded mechanisms; users are free
to change and modify runs as they progress. CUBE Voyager is an excellent choice
for model applications which require congestion feedback mechanisms.

Typically, transportation planning software is run as a
series of independent programs, any one of which could require a relatively
large amount of input control data, and consume a considerably large amount of
computer resources. Some programs could execute for hours, and operate most
efficiently with large amounts of RAM. A user may want to use Scenario Manager
in CUBE to run many scenarios which could require running a large number of
programs in successive order.

CUBE Voyager is a library of programs that employ a
language that allows the user to write the script to provide instructions for
performing all types of typical planning operations. The script is stored in a
file and then read when the system is executed. The individual programs are
activated according to the instructions in the script. Each program is designed
to perform certain operations, but only as specified by the user. A typical
application could involve a very complicated set of instructions, or can be as
simple as computing and/or printing a number from a file. It is the user’s
responsibility to design the process that is to be run.

The binary files generated by CUBE Voyager are designed to
reduce disk storage requirements and reduce the amount of time spent on
input/output. They have a proprietary format that can not be used by other
software, but they can be translated to other formats by the user.

**Parent topic:** [Introduction](GUID-A73FA9DB-8D98-4719-BAD9-2A61507CD6A1.html)

|
|  |
|
|  |
