# Control Statements

TRNBUILD has several levels of control statements. Some
statements must be input before other statements, so that certain memory
allocations can be made at the appropriate times. The order of statements is
not important except that the level 1 statements must be read before any level
2 statements. At the first occurrence of any level 2 statement, the input
network (designated on the
[FILEI](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__FILEI_unique_6) statement) is opened, certain memory allocations
(specifications obtained from
[PHASE1](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__PHASE1) statement values) are made, and most level 1
statement values are no longer acceptable. If these rules are violated, and the
program can’t adjust itself at that time, fatal messages may be issued. There
are exceptions, but the fatal messages can be avoided if the rules are adhered
to.

Level 1 statements:
[FILEI](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__FILEI_unique_6),
[PHASE1](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__PHASE1)

Level 2 statements:
[LINE](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__LINE_unique_1),
[LINK](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__LINK),
[PNR](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__PNR),
[SELECT](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__SELECT),
[SUPPORT](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__SUPPORT),
[XY](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__XY),
[ZONEACCESS](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__ZONEACCESS)

All other statements can be input at any time.

The following control words are available in the TRNBUILD
module.

[COMBINE](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__COMBINE_unique_1) - Line combination specifications
[FACTOR](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__FACTOR) - Various mode and mode-to-mode factors
[FARE](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__FARE_unique_1) - Compute fares from path
[FARELINKS](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__FARELINKS) - Establish fare links
[FILEI](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__FILEI_unique_6) - input files
[FILEO](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__FILEO_unique_7) - Output files
[LINE](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__LINE_unique_1) - Describe public transport lines
[LINK](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__LINK) - Insert underlying links for LINES
[MATRICES](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__MATRICES) - Compute path level-of-service matrices
[MULTIACCESS](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__MULTIACCESS)[PARAMETERS](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__PARAMETERS_unique_8) - Specify basic parameters
[PHASE1](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__PHASE1) - Initialization parameters
[PNR](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__PNR) - Drive access specifications
[REPORT](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__REPORT_unique_8) - Request standard reports
[SEGLIMITS](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__SEGLIMITS) - Travel segment limits
[SELECT](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__SELECT) - Select process zones
[SUPPLINK](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__SUPPLINK) - Describe single nontransit links
[SUPPORT](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__SUPPORT) - Describe multiple non-transit links
[TRIPS](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__TRIPS) - Input trip matrices
[XFERGEN](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__XFERGEN) - Generate transfer support links
[XY](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__XY) - Add / modify node coordinates
[ZONEACCESS](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__ZONEACCESS) - Walk access specifications

COMBINE

Line-combining specification. Keywords include:

- [IF](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__COMBINEIF)
- [MAXDIFF](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__COMBINEMAXDIFF)

COMBINE Keywords

- IF - |s255\*| -
  Designates the criteria for determining if a line between two nodes is to be
  combined with another line between the same two nodes during path building. At
  each boarding node the program examines all the stop nodes that are accessible
  via the lines that stop at the boarding node. If a downstream node is
  accessible on more than one line, it is possible that some travelers would use
  one line and others would use the other lines. In such a cases the program must
  determine the allocation of users between the lines. But, first a decision must
  be made to see if, and which, lines should be combined. The
  COMBINE MAXDIFF and IF selections are used to
  help make that combining decision. There may be one
  MAXDIFF value and one
  IF selection for each mode (combining is
  possible only within the same transit mode).

  In line choice situations the program determines which
  line (simply on its own merits) provides the best path and saves that as the
  "best." Then every other line is compared to the best line to determine if it
  should be considered in combination with the best line. To make this
  combination decision, the program looks first at the differences in total times
  (the line vs. best line). If the difference does not exceed the
  MAXDIFF value for the mode, the lines will be
  combined. If the difference exceeds
  MAXDIFF, and there is an
  IF selection for the mode, the
  IF is evaluated.
  IF
  selections result in either a true or false value. If the
  result is true, the line will be combined with the best line; if it is false,
  the line is deleted from consideration at this node. If the difference exceeds
  MAXDIFF and there is no
  IF, the line is deleted. See the description
  concerning combining lines for details of the combining process.

  The
  IF selection expression must be enclosed
  within (). The expression may reference any of the following variables:

  - I — Origin zone of the trip
  - M0 — Mode used to arrive at N1
  - N1 — Boarding node
  - N2 — Downstream node
  - MINWAIT — Wait time for the best line
  - MINRUN — Run time for the best line
  - MINTIME — MINWAIT + MINRUN
  - WAIT— Wait time for the line under consideration
  - RUN — Run time for the line under consideration
  - TIME — WAIT + RUN
  - BOARD — Number of transit boards prior to N1
- MAXDIFF
  - |R255\*| - <0> is the first process tested in the
  combination decision process. If the line’s total time does not exceed best
  time +
  MAXDIFF, the line will be combined with the
  best line.

  You may specify
  MAXDIFF and an
  IF for each mode. The program provides a
  default
  MAXDIFF of 0 for each mode, but you must
  provide any IF
  selections.

Example

```
COMBINE MAXDIFF = 255*0 ; Default process.
COMBINE IF[1]=(
(N1=5000 && N2==6000-6010,7002 && (((WAIT+RUN)–MINTIME) <=3.25)) ||
(I=1-100,500 && (wait - minwait) <= 2.00 && (time - mintime) < 3) ||
(((WAIT+RUN)–MINTIME) <= 5.00) ),  ; mode 1
(((WAIT+RUN)–MINTIME) <= 3.25 ),  ; mode 2
5 * ( (wait-minwait)<=2 && (run-minrun)<= 2) ; modes 3-7
; no IFs for modes 8-10
```

FACTOR

Wait, xfer, mode factors. Keywords and sub-keywords
include:

- [BOARDPEN](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__BOARDPEN)
- [IWAITFAC](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__IWAITFAC)
- [IWAITMAX](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__IWAITMAX)
- [IWAITMIN](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__IWAITMIN)
- [MAXWAITTIME](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__MAXWAITTIME)

  - [NODES](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__FACTORNODES)
- [MODEFAC](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__MODEFAC)
- [NOX](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__NOX)
- [XPEN](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__XPEN)
- [XPENFAC](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__XPENFAC)
- [XWAITFAC](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__XWAITFAC)
- [XWAITMAX](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__XWAITMAX)
- [XWAITMIN](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__XWAITMIN)

FACTOR Keywords

- BOARDPEN
  - |KRV15\*| - Perceived time value to be added to the path
  time when a transit boarding is involved. BOARDPEN[1] is added to the first
  boarding, [2] is added to the second, etc. It is used primarily to discourage
  multiple boardings. There may be up to 15 values.
- IWAITFAC -
  |KRV255\*| - Factor to convert initial wait time for a mode to perceived wait
  time.
- IWAITMAX -
  |KRV255\*| - Maximum actual initial wait time allowed.
- IWAITMIN -
  |KRV255\*| - Minimum actual initial wait time allowed.
- MAXWAITTIME -
  |R| - <0> is a value to be considered as the maximum wait time between
  transit lines at the nodes that are listed in the following N= list(s). This
  keyword may be specified more than once on a statement. The value must be
  greater than 0 and less than 180. The purpose of this keyword is to specify
  transfer nodes where the line arrival/departure times are synchronized. Note
  that this value is not considered when calculating initial board time. The
  English short name is MWT.

  - MAXWAITTIME -
    NODES - |IPV| - Nodes where the most prior
    MAXWAITTIME value is to be applied. If a explicit or implied value exceeds the
    highest stop node number, that node is ignored. Thus, NODES=500-10000000 can be
    used to set all nodes. The English short name is N.
- MODEFAC - |KRV255\*|
  - Factor to convert link time to perceived time.
- NOX - |K?V255[255]\*| -
  Used to preclude a path from going directly between links which have certain
  modes. A true value is used to preclude the path.
- XPEN - |KRV255[255]\*| -
  FValue to be added to the path time at each node. The value is in actual time
  and must be 0-60.
- XPENFAC -
  |KRV255[255]\*| - Factor to convert
  XPEN to perceived time.
- XWAITFAC
  - |KRV255\*| - Factor to convert transfer wait time to
  perceived wait time.
- XWAITMAX -
  |KRV255\*| - Maximum actual transfer wait time allowed.
- XWAITMIN -
  |KRV255\*| - Minimum actual transfer wait time allowed.

Use
FACTORS to account for certain types of activity
based upon either the mode of the link being entered, or upon the mode of the
link being exited in combination with the mode of the link being entered. All
these keywords are used to enter values into arrays where the index corresponds
directly with the mode. The keywords with double dimensions (NOX,
XPEN, XPENFAC) are based upon mode-to-mode activity, where the
first index implies the from mode, and the second index implies the to mode.
If, for those keywords, only one index is specified, the second index is
assumed to be 1.

Use
[IWAITMAX](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__IWAITMAX),
[IWAITMIN](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__IWAITMIN),
[XWAITMAX](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__XWAITMAX), and
[XWAITMIN](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__XWAITMIN) to account for discrepancies in the general use of
line frequencies when computing wait time at a node. For example, a line may
have a headway of 60 minutes, and the average wait for the line would be 30
minutes. But the transit system schedulers may have arranged schedules so that
generally the wait times are kept to some more reasonable limit. Use
IWAITMAX and
XWAITMAX to set somewhat tighter controls on that
aspect. It is generally considered that a knowledgeable user will arrive at his
first boarding node at a time that minimizes the wait time; thus, you can set
IWAIT… values separately from
XWAIT… values.

Use
[IWAITMIN](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__IWAITMIN) and
[XWAITMIN](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__XWAITMIN) to effectively cause a wait time greater than the
computed minimum to be used. In a busy grid, there may be shuttle busses
running at every minute. At some nodes the east-west busses may arrive at the
same time as the north-south busses. In all likelihood, the transfer could not
be made within the normal 30 second wait time, so additional wait time would be
required.

Example

```
IWAITFAC=255*2.0  ; all initial wait factors are 2.0
IWAITMIN[3]=4,5.5,3*6  ; beginning at mode 3: 4.00 5.50 6.00 6.00 6.00
NOX[11]= y,n,n,y   ; NOX 11->1 and 11->4
NOX[12][12] = y,n,n,y  ; NOX 12->12 and 12->15
XWAITMIN=10*0.5, XWAITMAX=10*12.55 XWAITFAC=2,9*2.5
MAXWAITTIME=5, NODES=800, 901-903
MWT=5, N=800, 901-903 ; same as previous line
```

FARE

The FARE control statement defines fare values. Keywords
include:

- [MODEFARE](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__MODEFARE)
- [XFARE](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__XFARE)

FARE Keywords

- MODEFARE -
  |KIV255\*| - An array of fares based upon mode. During path extraction, each
  path segment (every non-transit link, or transit boarding) is assessed a fare
  based upon the mode of the segment. These fares are accumulated for the path
  and stored in the
  MODEFARE skim variable. The highest
  MODEFARE encountered for a path is stored in
  the
  MAXMODEFARE skim variable. The
  MODEFARE and
  MAXMODEFARE skim variables can be accessed via
  the
  [MATRICES](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__MATRICES) statement.
- XFARE - |KIV255\*255|
  - An array of transit fares that are to be assessed each time a transit segment
  is boarded. The array is dimensioned as 255 (from\_mode) \* 255 (to\_mode), but
  not all values used. The array is used only when transit is boarded. For the
  first boarding, the non-transit to transit
  XFARE value is used, and for subsequent
  boardings, only the prior\_transit to the boarding transit mode
  XFARE value is used. During path extraction,
  the
  XFARE values used are accumulated into the
  XFARE skim variable, and the highest
  XFARE is saved in the
  MAXXFARE skim variable. The
  XFARE and
  MAXXFARE
  skim variables can be accessed via the
  [MATRICES](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__MATRICES) statement.

The fares are all entered as signed integer units within the
range of -32767 to 32767. The summary and maximum value variables may not be
less than 0, or greater than 65535. Any negative values are set to zero at the
end of the path extraction. Because users code networks with different
techniques and have different fare computation processes, and there is no
single way to compute fares. Some users may wish to have an
XFARE for all 255 x 255 possibilities, but If the
path goes from transit to non-transit to transit, excessive fares would be
assessed (the current logic with
XFARE precludes this from happening). Other users
may wish to code non-transit links with a
MODEFARE, and not use
XFARE at all. In that case, consecutive
non-transit links could cause a problem.

Most likely,
MODEFARE and
XFARE would not be used in the same application,
but that combination may be useful for certain networks.

Fares based upon distance or time traveled can be obtained
by using the STEPFUNC function described on the
[MATRICES](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__MATRICES) control statement.

Example

```
FARE MODEFARE=3*50,0,0,4*75,0 ; sets transit fares for modes 1-10
XFARE[11] = 10*50, XFARE[12] = 10*50;
```

FARELINKS

Sets fare links. Keywords include:

- [FARE](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__FLFARE)
- [MODES](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__FLMODES)
- [L](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__FLL)
- [ONEWAY](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__FLONEWAY)

Fare links are links, that when traversed in a path, cause
an additional fare to be added to the I-J mode-based fare. A total of all such
fares is accumulated during I-J path tracing (done only when LOS matrices are
being accumulated). At the end of the trace, the fare-link total is added to
the I-J fare accumulated in the normal fashion. The fare-link total can be
either negative or positive. However, if the final total fare (mode-based +
fare-link) value is negative, it will be reset to zero. During the trace and
accumulation, all fare links that are traversed are used in the accumulation;
there is no logical combination of the links other than full addition.

Fare links on multi-path segments of the path can cause
strange results. Suppose that the path from I-J splits between two lines: A and
B. If line A has a fare link and line B does not, then the fare from the fare
link on line A will be factored according to the portion of the trips that
would be assigned to line A between the points of divergence. Thus, the fare
link might indicate a fare of 100 should be assessed, but only a portion will
be.

FARELINKS Keywords

- FARE
  - |R| - Fare assessed to the links on the statement.

  The fare is accumulated in the
  MODEFARE skim variable.
  MODEFARE is accessable when defining work
  matrices under the
  [MATRICES](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__MATRICES) control statement.
- MODES - |IVP| -
  Modes for which the specified links apply. Each statement must specify at least
  one valid mode.
- L - |IVP| - Links
  specified as fare links. Code links as A-B, A-B, etc. Code the links
  directionally. Use the keyword
  ONEWAY to specify if the links are entered
  only one way.
- ONEWAY - |?| - Flag
  that indicates whether links are entered as A-B and B-A:

  - True — Links entered in A-B direction only.
  - False —
    Default value. Links entered as
    A-B and B-A.

Example

```
FARELINKS FARE=20 MODES=1-3,7 L=1000-1001, 2000-2001
FARELINKS FARE=-10 L=8000-1010 ONEWAY=TRUE, MODES=9
FARELINKS FARE=25 L=500-510,510-511 MODES=15 ; need not be transit
```

FILEI

Inputs data files. Keywords include:

- [NETI](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__NETI_unique_3)
- [MATI](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__MATI_unique_4)
- [FAREMATI](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__FAREMATI_unique_1)

FILEI Keywords

- NETI
  - |KF| - Name of the input network file.
- MATI - |KF| - Name of
  the input trips matrix file. See
  [TRIPS](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__TRIPS) for details.
- FAREMATI - |KF255|
  - This statement will cause the program to read a file of stop-to-stop fares
  for the mode of the index of this keyword. (FAREMATI[3]=filename will enter the
  data records from the file to be applied to mode 3.) The index should be a
  transit mode. The file record format is: FromNode, ToNode, Fare, Direction.
  Direction is optional and has meaning only if it is a "1," which means that the
  fare is applied only in the direction of FromNode -> ToNode. Otherwise
  (without Direction, or Direction != 1), a reverse fare entry is also made.

The fare matrix is searched anytime there is a path segment
on a mode for which there is a FAREMATI. Assume a path of segments:

```
1-100 (mode=11),
100-101 (2)
101-102 (2)
102-103 (2)
103-300 (5)
300-301 (5)
301-400 (12)
400-308 (5)
308-2 (12)
```

The search process begins when a new mode is boarded; a
search is made for the boarding node to the exit node where the path changes
mode. In this example, the first search is node 100 (board mode 2) to node 103
(exit mode 2). If there is an entry, the fare will be applied. If there is no
entry, a search will be made to determine if there are entries for any
combinations of the modes 100-101-102- 103, that would cover the entire string.
The following node-node combinations would be searched. If a search combination
is found the fare is assessed, and the next mode is processed. If no valid
combination is found, no fare assessed. The following combinations were be
searched for mode 2:

```
100-103
100-102 and 102-103
100-101 and 101-103
100-101, 101-102, and 102-103
```

Then there would be search for mode 5 nodes 103 to node 301
(103-300-301) followed by a search for mode 5 (400-308). Note that there will
not be search for 103-308 because the path has a mode change between the
segments.

Different FAREMATI keywords may point to the same file, in
order to enter the same structure for different modes. Mode mixing can not
occur.

The values can be obtained in the MATRICES MW statements:
MW[] = faremat(modes…) (0 is the total of the modes.)

Example

```
FILEI NETI=?hwy.net ; ? will be replaced by current system prefix.
NETI = r:\work\?\base.net ; r:\work\ALTA\vase.net -- system prefix = ALTA
MATI = mytrip.fil ; referenced by TRIPS statement.
FAREMATI[2] = myfare.mat
```

FILEO

Outputs files. Keywords and sub-keywords include:

- [LINEVOLO](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__LINEVOLO)

  - [FORMAT](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__LINEVOLOFORMAT)
  - [ID](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__LINEVOLOID)
- [LINKO](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__LINKO_unique_2)
- [LINKVOLO](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__LINKVOLO)

  - [FORMAT](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__LINKVOLOFORMAT)
  - [ID](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__LINKVOLOID)
- [MATO](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__MATO_unique_4)
- [NETO](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__NETO_unique_3)currently disabled!

  - [MODES](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__NETOMODES)
  - [STOPSONLY](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__NETOSTOPSONLY)
- [NODEO](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__NODEO_unique_1)
- [SUPPORTO](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__SUPPORTO)

  - [FIXED](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__SUPPORTOFIXED)
  - [MODES](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__SUPPORTOMODES)
  - [ONEWAY](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__SUPPORTOONEWAY)

FILEO Keywords

- LINEVOLO - |KF| -
  Name of the text file where the program writes line summary records. If an
  assignment is undertaken and this file is specified, the program writes a
  record for each
  [LINE](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__LINE_unique_1) containing the following fields: Name, Mode, Owner,
  Frequency, LineTime, LineDistance, TotalBoardings, PassengerMiles,
  PassengerHours, ID. Specify the format of the file with the FORMAT subkeyword.
- LINEVOLO -
  FORMAT - ID that the program writes as the
  last field in the
  LINEVOLO records. It may be any length, but
  will be truncated to 10 characters if FORMAT=T.
- LINEVOLO
  -
  ID
  - Specifies the format for writing LINEVOLO records.
  Possible values:

  - TXT
  - CSV (or any word that begins with C) — Indicates
    comma separated values.
  - T — Indicates fixed-length fields (default value).
- LINKO
  - |KF| - Name of database file (DBF) where program writes
  all transit links and support links. You can process this file with other
  software, such as CUBE Base. Each link record contains the following variables:

  - A — A-node of link
  - B — B-node of link
  - TIME — A-B time (hundredths of minutes)
  - MODE — Mode of link (1-255)
  - COLOR — User designated drawing color
  - STOP\_A—1=Aisastopnode
  - STOP\_B—1=Bisastopnode
  - DIST — A-B distance
  - NAME — Name of line on this link
  - FREQ — Service frequency

  If assignment is made, the program adds the following
  variables to each link:

  - SEQ — Link sequence in the line
  - OWNER — Line owner
  - AB\_VOL — Volume
  - AB\_BRDA — Number of trip boardings a A
  - AB\_XITA — Number of exits at A
  - AB\_BRDB — Number of boardings at B
  - AB\_XITB — Number of exits at B

  These AB\_ variables contain values for trips on the
  line going in the A-B direction; the XITA and BRDB values are not related to
  the VOL. An additional set of variables (prefixed with BA\_) is also included
  for trips on the reverse direction line if the line is coded as not oneway. BA\_
  values reference A and B in a true sense; BA\_BRDA references A for this link
  (not the A of the reverse link).
- LINKVOLO
  - |KF| - Name of the text file where program writes link
  summary records. If specified, program writes a record for each
  [LINK](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__LINK) containing the following fields: A, B, Time, Mode,
  Plot, StopA, StopB, Distance, Name, Owner, [Volume,] ID. (Plot is either a 1 or
  a 0 to indicate this is the best record for this A-B to plot. Volume is not
  written if assignment is not in effect.) Specify the format of the file with
  the FORMAT subkeyword.
- LINKVOLO - FORMAT - |S| -
  Specifies the format for writing LINKVOLO records.
  Possible values:

  - TXT
  - CSV (or any word that begins with C) — Indicates
    comma- separated values.
  - T — Indicates fixed-length fields (default).
- LINKVOLO
  -
  ID - |S| - ID that the program writes as the
  last field in the
  LINKVOLO records.
- MATO - |KF| - Name of
  the file where program writes
  [MATRICES](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__MATRICES).
- NETO - |KF| - Name of
  the file where the program writes transit network. The program writes a binary
  network of transit links. Use the subkeywords to reduce the number of links.
  This option is currently disabled.
- NETO -
  MODES - |IVP| - Modes included when writing
  links to the
  NETO file. If no modes are designated, the
  program includes all modes by default.
  Currently disabled.
- NETO
  -
  STOPSONLY - |?| - Flag that indicates the
  types of transit links the program writes to the NETO file:

  - True — Program writes transit links that connect
    stops only.
  - False — Program writes transit links coded on the
    [LINE](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__LINE_unique_1) control statements.
- NODEO - |KF| - Name
  of a database file where program writes node records with coordinates. You
  might use this file to add additional coordinates in other software, such as
  the CUBE Base.
- SUPPORTO - |KF| -
  Name of the file where program writes support links in the format of the
  [SUPPLINK](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__SUPPLINK) control statement.

  Use the
  SUPPORTO keyword to write all the support
  links to a single file and in a consistent format. After creating a valid
  support links file, you can use the file to speed up subsequent applications by
  reading in this file directly and bypass zonal access development by setting
  [ZONEACCESS](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__ZONEACCESS)[GENERATE](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__GENERATE_unique_1) to false. Essentially, this file (with all
  nontransit modes), along with the
  [LINE](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__LINE_unique_1) file(s) and the input highway network constitute a
  complete transit network.
- SUPPORTO -
  FIXED
  - |?| - Flag that indicates how the program writes the
  data fields to statements in the
  SUPPORTO file:

  - False — Indicates statements are completely free
    form.
  - True — Indicates fixed-length fields, providing
    easier browsing, but requiring more disk space.
- SUPPORTO -
  MODES - |?| - Flag that indicates how the
  program writes support links:

  - True — Indicates program writes each support link
    as A-B.
  - False — Indicates program writes truly two-way
    support links in low-high format, and flags one-way links as one-way.
- SUPPORTO -
  ONEWAY - |IVP| - Support modes that program
  selects when writing to
  SUPPORTO file. If you designate no modes, the
  program will issue a fatal message.

Example

```
FILEO NODEO = trnnode.dbf ; output node file
FILEO LINKO = trnlink.dbf ; output link file
FILEO MATO = ?los.mat ; output transit LOS values
FILEO LINEVOLO=linevol.csv, ID=ASSIGNB, FORMAT=CSV
FILEO LINKVOLO=linkvol.txt, ID=ASSIGNB, FORMAT=text
SUPPORTO = D:SUPPORT MODES=11-16 ONEWAY=N FIXED=Y
Result:
SUPPLINK N=1-7783 MODE=11 DIST= 30 SPEED= 2.5 ONEWAY=Y
SUPPLINK N=3-7592 MODE=11 DIST= 133 SPEED= 2.5
SUPPLINK N=3-7593 MODE=11 DIST= 20 SPEED= 2.5
SUPPLINK N=7-7688 MODE=11 DIST= 16 SPEED= 2.5
.
.
SUPPLINK N=1007-7689 MODE=11 DIST= 26 SPEED= 2.5
.
.
SUPPORTO=D:SUPPORT MODES=11-16 ONEWAY=Y FIXED=N
Result:
SUPPLINK N=1-7783 MODE=11 DIST=30 SPEED=2.5 ONEWAY=Y
SUPPLINK N=3-7592 MODE=11 DIST=133 SPEED=2.5 ONEWAY=Y
SUPPLINK N=3-7593 MODE=11 DIST=20 SPEED=2.5 ONEWAY=Y
SUPPLINK N=7-7688 MODE=11 DIST=16 SPEED=2.5 ONEWAY=Y
.
.
SUPPLINK N=1007-7689 MODE=11 DIST=26 SPEED=2.5 ONEWAY=Y
.
SUPPLINK N=7593-3 MODE=11 DIST=20 SPEED=2.5 ONEWAY=Y
.
.
```

LINE

Defines transit lines. Keywords and sub-keywords include:

- [ALLSTOPS](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__ALLSTOPS_unique_1)
- [COLOR](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__COLOR_unique_1)
- [FREQUENCY](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__FREQUENCY_unique_1)
- [FREQUENCYR](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__FREQUENCYR)
- [GLOBAL](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__GLOBAL_unique_1)

  - [CLEAR](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__CLEAR)
- [MODE](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__MODE_unique_1)
- [NAME](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__NAME_unique_2)
- [NODES](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__NODES_unique_2)

  - [ACCESS](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__ACCESS_unique_1)
  - [ACCESS\_C](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__ACCESSC_unique_1)
  - [DELAY](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__DELAY_unique_1)
  - [DELAY\_C](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__DELAYC_unique_1)
  - [RT](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__RT_unique_1)
  - [SPEED](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__SPEED_unique_3)
  - [TF](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__TF_unique_1)
  - [TIME](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__TIME_unique_2)
  - [XYSPD](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__XYSPD)
- [ONEWAY](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__ONEWAY_unique_1)
- [RUNTIME](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__RUNTIME_unique_1)
- [SHORTNAME](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__SHORTNAME_unique_1)
- [TIMEFAC](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__TIMEFAC_unique_1)
- [USERA1](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__USERA_unique_1),
  [USERA2](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__USERA_unique_1),
  [USERA3](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__USERA_unique_1),
  [USERA4](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__USERA_unique_1),
  [USERA5](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__USERA_unique_1)
- [USERN1](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__USERN_unique_1),
  [USERN2](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__USERN_unique_1),
  [USERN3](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__USERN_unique_1),
  [USERN4](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__USERN_unique_1),
  [USERN5](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__USERN_unique_1)
- [XYSPEED](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__XYSPEED_unique_1)

LINE Keywords

- ALLSTOPS - |?| -
  Flag that indicates whether nodes are all stop nodes:

  - True — Program considers all specified
    [NODES](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__NODES_unique_2) as stop nodes, even if they are explicitly designated
    as non- stop nodes.
  - False — Program examines explicit node
    designations.
- COLOR - |I| - Color
  that CUBE Base uses to display the line.
- FREQUENCY -
  |RV5\*| - Time between arrival of vehicles on this line (also called the
  headway). There must be a
  FREQUENCY[n], where n is the frequency period
  as defined by
  [PARAMETERS FREQPERIOD](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__FREQPERIOD), or TRNBUILD will not include the line
  in this transit network.
- FREQUENCYR
  - |RV5\*| - Frequency for the line in the reverse
  direction. If you do not supply any FREQUENCYR\*\*\*\* values (from either global
  or statement keywords), the program sets the entire
  FREQUENCYR
  array equal to the
  FREQUENCY
  array.
- GLOBAL - |?| - Flag
  that indicates whether the program saves line parameters in the line global
  area. When reading each line, the program sets initial values for many of the
  above variables from the line global area. The variables set in the line global
  area are:
  ONEWAY, MODE, ALLSTOPS, COLOR, FREQUENCY, TIMEFAC,
  XYSPEED. If
  FREQUENCYR is set in the LINE statement or in
  the input global area, then it is also included in the global area.

  Note: Global values are not compatible with transit- network
  editing in CUBE Base. Therefore, Bentley recommends that you not use global
  values.
- GLOBAL -
  CLEAR - |?| - Flag that indicates whether the
  program clears line global parameters (set global ONEWAY to true) before moving
  them to the line work area. To clear the global values, but not save the line
  work parameters in the line global area, code:
  GLOBAL=N, CLEAR=Y.
- MODE - |I| - Mode for
  this line; it may not conflict with support modes used.
- NAME - |S| - Name of
  the line. It may be up to 12 characters in length, and must be unique. The
  program truncates longer names and issues a warning. Duplicate line names will
  cause a fatal error.

  Note: If
  [ONEWAY](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__ONEWAY_unique_1) is false for the line, the program generates a
  reverse image line with the same name, but with the "-" character appended to
  it. Thus, you cannot use a hyphen as the last character in a line name.
- NODES - |IV| - List
  of nodes that the line passes through. Follow each node by another node, or one
  of the
  NODES subkeywords. Two adjacent nodes—even if
  there are intervening subkeywords—form a transit link. Positive-numbered nodes
  are stop nodes; negative-numbered nodes are non- stopping nodes. However, if
  ALLSTOPS is true for the line,
  negative-numbered nodes are considered as stops, too.

  If
  NODES appears multiple times for the line, the
  program joins the last node of the previous node string and the first node of
  the current node string to form another link. You may separate node numbers
  with spaces, commas, or hyphens. If you insert any of the
  NODES subkeywords in the string of node
  numbers, you must re-enter the
  NODES keyword following the subkeyword value.
  To simplify the coding in such cases, you may use the word
  N as an alias for
  NODES.

  Bentley recommends coding the NODES keyword as the last
  keyword for the line.
- NODES -
  ACCESS - |I| - Restricts access at the
  previous node. Possible values:

  - 0 — No restriction
  - 1 — Boarding only
  - 2 — Exit only

  This access restriction is inverted for the line’s
  reverse direction.
- NODES -
  ACCESS\_C - |I| - Restricts access at the
  previous node and at the following nodes, until the program encounters another
  ACCESS\_C or
  ACCESS subkeyword.

  Note: When applying
  ACCESS\_C, you must make sure that the last
  node of a line has exit access (0 or 2); otherwise, the line may become
  useless.
- NODES -
  DELAY - |R| - Additional time delay added to
  the link time. Code
  DELAY between two nodes.
- NODES -
  DELAY\_C - |R| - Additional time delay added to
  all subsequent links, until program encounters another
  DELAY\_C or
  DELAY
  subkeyword.
- NODES -
  RT - |R| - Sets an intermediate runtime from
  the beginning of the line to the previously coded nod. The program adjusts the
  accumulated time to the node to meet this value, and adjusts all accumulated
  times to downstream nodes to account for the adjustment at the node.

  If there is more than one
  RT, or there is an RT and a
  [RUNTIME](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__RUNTIME_unique_1), the program makes subsequent adjustments from the
  node of prior adjustment. If there is an
  RT value after the last node and a
  RUNTIME value,
  RUNTIME prevails. If the line is not one-way,
  the program reflects
  RT values are reflected in the reverse
  direction, but makes the adjustment relative to the end of the line in the
  reverse direction.

  RT values on a line must be
  increasing. If used,
  [RUNTIME](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__RUNTIME_unique_1) must be greater than the last
  RT.
- NODES -
  SPEED - |R| - Sets the speed for current link
  and all subsequent links in the line (from the input network or any :ref:LINK
  <trn-cs-link> records), until the program
  encounters another
  SPEED or
  TF
  subkeyword. Only specify
  SPEED within a node string.
- NODES -
  TF
  - |R| - Resets the LINE[TIMEFAC](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__TIMEFAC_unique_1) value from the current link until the program
  encounters another
  TF
  subkeyword or
  SPEED subkeyword.
- NODES -
  TIME - |R| - Sets the operation time for the
  link surrounding this keyword.
- NODES -
  XYSPD - |R| - Resets the
  LINE[XYSPEED](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__XYSPEED_unique_1) value from the prior node until the program
  encounters another XYSPD subkeyword.

  Indicates the speed along any subsequent links that are
  not in the input network and that are not in any trn-cs-line-nodes-xyspd
  statements.
  [XYSPEED](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__XYSPEED_unique_1) must be great than zero; the program cannot compute
  operating characteristics for links that have a value of zero.
- ONEWAY - |?| - Flag
  that indicates how the program saves a line:

  - True — Program only saves the specified line.
  - False — Program saves both the specified line and
    its reversed counterpart.
- RUNTIME - |R| -
  Scheduled time of the line from the first node to the last node. If specified,
  the program adjusts the time on all the links in the line so that the total of
  the line’s link times matches this value.

  Note: [RT](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__RT_unique_1) values will alter the way the program adjusts values.
  Rather than using RUNTIME, Bentley recommends placing an RT value at the end of
  the NODES definition. Both methods result in the same overall line time, but
  using RT is consistent with other adjustments.
- SHORTNAME - |S| -
  Optional. An abbreviated name for the
  line. Same as
  [USERA1](GUID-CAE2709E-34AD-F239-A34E-E07092912BD2)
- TIMEFAC - |S| -
  Multiplier used to compute times along the line’s links that have base times
  determined from the input network or any LINK statements. The program applies
  this multiplier until encountering another
  TIMEFAC,
  [TF](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__TF_unique_1), or
  [SPEED](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__SPEED_unique_3) keyword. You must place
  TIMEFAC before NODES. The program uses the
  last value of
  TIMEFAC before
  [NODES](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__NODES_unique_2). After specifying
  NODES, use
  TF to modify this multiplier.
- USERA1 - |S| -
  Optional. User-defined string.
  [SHORTNAME](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__SHORTNAME_unique_1) maps to this variable and cannot be used at the
  same time.
- USERA2 - |S| -
  Optional. User-defined string.
- USERA3 - |S| -
  Optional. User-defined string.
- USERA4 - |S| -
  Optional. User-defined string.
- USERA5 - |S| - Optional. User-defined string.
- USERN1 - |R| -
  Optional. User-defined number.
- USERN2 - |R| -
  Optional. User-defined number.
- USERN3 - |R| -
  Optional. User-defined number.
- USERN4 - |R| -
  Optional. User-defined number.
- USERN5 - |R| -
  Optional. User-defined number.
- XYSPEED - |R| -
  Speed for a line’s link if the link does not exist in the input network and
  does have a
  [LINK](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__LINK) statement, but both nodes of the link have valid
  coordinates (allowing the program to compute distances).

When reading a
LINE statement, the program initializes
LINE processing with the following steps:

- If this is the first
  LINE statement, clear all global values, and
  set global
  ONEWAY
  to true.
- If CLEAR is true (no matter where it is specified on
  the record), clear the line global parameters, and set global
  ONEWAY to true.
- Set the line’s working parameters equal to the line’s
  global parameters.

After reading a
LINE statement without errors, if
GLOBAL is true, the program saves the current line
parameters in the line’s global area for use by subsequent lines. The program
can use a
LINE statement with no
NAME and no
NODES to reset the line’s global area. If all
FREQUENCYR
values are zero, the program resets
FREQUENCYR to
FREQUENCY
after saving to global, so that global
FREQUENCYR
is not affected.

Upon encountering each link in a node string, the program
determines the time and distance that the line uses with the following decision
logic:

- If the link is found in either a
  LINK statement or in the input network:

  - If
    TIME has a value, set link time =
    TIME
  - Else if
    SPEED has a value, set link time to
    distance/SPEED Else set link time to link time \*
    TIMEFAC
- Else if the link is not found but has coordinates:

  - If
    TIME has a value, set link time to
    TIME If
    XYSPEED has a value, set link time to
  - X-Y distance/XYSPEED
  - Else produce an error
- Else the link can not be determined, so produce an
  error

Example

```
LINE GLOBAL=y CLEAR=y MODE=3 ONEWAY=y TIMEFAC=1.2 ; setup global
LINE NAME=abc FREQUENCY=5,15,20,5 ONEWAY=n, ; basic values
N= 801-802-803 SPEED=23 N=804 805 -1805 806 807, -901,
DELAY=3 N=902,905,1006
LINE NAME=with_times NODES=801 802 803 RT=21.5 NODES=804 805 806,
RT=40 NODES=807 808 809 RT=50 NODES=9001 9002
```

LINK

Link data for use by LINE definitions (must precede the LINE
statement that includes the link). Keywords include: +
[CLEAR](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__CLEARLINK)
+
[DIST](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__DIST) +
[GLOBAL](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__GLOBALLINK) +
[LANES](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__LANES) +
[MODES](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__MODES) +
[NODES](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__NODESLINK) +
[ONEWAY](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__ONEWAYLINK) +
[SPDCODE](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__SPDCODE) +
[SPEED](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__SPEEDLINK) +
[TIME](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__TIMELINK)

LINK Keywords

- CLEAR - |?| -
  Flag that indicates whether the program sets the link’s global area to all
  zeroes before beginning any other statement processing. Applies no matter where
  CLEAR appears on the statement.
- DIST - |I| - Distance
  for the link, usually considered as hundredths of miles, or kilometers. The
  value may not exceed 20,000.
- GLOBAL - |?| -
  Flag that indicates whether the program saves link values into the link’s
  global area.

  When reading the statement, the program initializes
  link values from the link’s global area, and then updates current values based
  on the statement’s keyword settings. If
  GLOBAL is true, the program updates the link’s
  global values from the current link values. The global area contains time,
  speed, spdcode, lanes, oneway, and modes. See
  [Using TRNBUILD in CUBE Voyager](GUID-19A9EFF4-3A1C-4082-98F9-DA7D5C9BCF82.html#GUID-19A9EFF4-3A1C-4082-98F9-DA7D5C9BCF82) for notes about the use of
  GLOBAL.
- LANES - |I| - Number
  of directional lanes on the link. See SPDCODE for more details. The value must
  be 1-9.
- MODES - |IVP| -
  Specifies the modes for the link. You may code any combination of modes that
  does not conflict with the used transit modes. If you code the keyword more
  than one time on the statement, the program uses all the specified modes.
- NODES - |IVP| -
  Indicates the nodes that compose the link. Code the link as a pair of nodes
  separated by a dash.
- ONEWAY
  - |?| - Flag that indicates which links the program
  saves:

  - True — Program saves A-B and B-A.
  - False — Program only saves A-B.
- SPDCODE - |I| -
  SPDCODE for the link. If you specify
  SPDCODE and
  LANES, the program can compute the link speed
  by using the internal SPDCAP table stored in the input
  [NETI](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__NETI_unique_3) network. The SPDCAP is synonymous with SPDCLASS in the
  Network program. With speed and distance (DIST) determined, the time for the
  link can be determined. The value must be 1-99.
- SPEED - |R| -
  Speed for the link. If specified, the program does not use
  SPDCODE and LANES for
  speed computations. The value must be 0-999.
- TIME - |R| - Time,
  in minutes, for the link. If specified, the program does not use any keywords
  associated with speed. The value must be 0-999.

The
LINK statement provides information about links
that the program uses for transit lines and that do not exist in the input
network or have values that need to be revised. The program stores these links
separately does not consider them to be part of the network. Because the
program stores these links with other data, searching for them can be
inefficient. Because the program searches every link on a
[LINE](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__LINE_unique_1) statement, considerable time could be spent in the
search process. You can reduce the search time if the program reads all the
LINK statements at one time and saves them in a
contiguous area. Every link must have at least a distance, a time (or speed),
and a specified mode.

Example

```
LINK GLOBAL=y CLEAR=y MODES=1-10 ONEWAY=n
LINK NODES=1001-1002 DIST=100 SPEED=22.5
LINK DIST=250 TIME=15.5 NODES= 2003 - 3015 ONEWAY=y
```

MATRICES

Output matrix definitions. Keywords include:

- [NAME](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__NAMEMATRICES)
- [MW[ ]](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__MWMATRICES)

MATRICES Keywords

- NAME - |SV| -
  Name of extracted level-of-service matrix written to
  FILEO
  [MATO](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__MATO_unique_4). Must be unique.
- MW[ ] - |NV| -
  Specifies an expression solved for a matrix row. The program skims each I-J
  path to obtain certain values from the path, which the expression may use.
  Specifically, expressions may use the following values:

  - BOARDS — Number of transit boardings
  - IWAIT — Wait time for the initial boarding
  - MODEI— Mode of the link out of I
  - MODET1 — First transit mode used
  - NODE0\* — First node of each transit mode
  - NODEL\* — Last node of each transit mode
  - TIME\*\* — Total time for each mode
  - DIST\*\* — Distance for each mode
  - XWAIT\*\* — Total wait time for each mode boarded
    (excluding IWAIT)
  - XPEN — Sum of
    [XPEN](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__XPEN) values ([FACTOR](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__FACTOR) control statement) assessed in the path
  - XFARE — The sum of the
    [XFARE](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__XFARE) values (from
    [FARE](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__FARE_unique_1) control) assessed
  - MAXXFARE — The highest XFARE assessed
  - FARE\*\* — The total mode fare for each mode
  - MODEFARE — The accumulation of:

    - All mode fares as input via the
      [FARE](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__FARE_unique_1) control ([MODEFARE](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__MODEFARE) keyword), and
    - All mode fares as input via the
      [FARELINKS](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__FARELINKS) control ([FARE](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__FLFARE) keyword)
  - MAXMODEFARE — The highest single-mode fare assessed
  - FAREMAT\*\* — The sum of fares as input via
    [FAREMATI](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__FAREMATI_unique_1) for each mode
  - STEPFUNC\*\*\* — A function to lookup discrete values
    in a curve

  \* Requires a single argument; the argument is mode.

  \*\* Requires one, or more, arguments: the arguments
  indicate which modes are to be added to form the result. For example:
  TIME(1,2,3,5) will return the sum of time for modes 1-3, and 5. If a single
  argument is used, it may be 1000 (all modes), 1001 (all transit modes), 1002
  (all non-transit modes), or 0 (same as 1000). Ranges are not allowed; they are
  treated as numeric subtraction. Thus coding TIME (1-5) will be an error,
  because the parser will treat that as TIME (-4). TIME (5-1) will result in
  TIME(4).

  \*\*\* STEPFUNC is a function that scans a set of
  increasing X values to obtain a Y value. The value that is tested against the X
  values is the first argument to the function. The value most likely will be one
  of the above names with appropriate arguments. There must be an odd number of
  arguments to the function, and the X values must be ascending. The primary
  purpose of this function is to extract distance or time based fares, but it
  might have other uses. MW[8] in the example below illustrates how to extract
  fares based upon distance. The mode 4 distance will be checked against the X,Y
  curve that is supplied in the function arguments. The result will be either 0,
  100, 150, 200, or 300. The function will determine which X increment the value
  falls within and return the Y associated with the lower X. If the value is less
  than, or equal to, the first X, the result will be 0. In the example, a
  distance greater than 200 but less than, or equal to, 300 will result in a fare
  of 150, and any distance greater than 500 will result in 300. A boarding fare
  could be assessed by coding the first point as 0,fare. (dist(4,5), …) is valid
  and could also be coded as (dist(4)+dist(5),…).

  Each
  MW must have an index (if not specified, the
  default is 1).

Example

```
MATRICES MW[1] = BOARDS,
MW[2] = TIME(1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10), ; total transit time
MW[3] = dist(11,13,14,15), ; total walk time
MW[4] = (IWAIT + TIME(0) + XWAIT(0) + XPEN) * 0.01,  ; total time
MW[5] = NODEI, ; mode of access
MW[6] = NODE0(8), ; first boarding rail station
MW[7] = NODEL(8), ; last alighting rail station
MW[8] = STEPFUNC(DIST(4), 100,100, 200,150, 300,200, 500,300),
NAME = BOARDS, TOTAL_TIME, TOTAL_DIST, TTIME_MIN, ACCESS,
NAME[6] = RAIL1, RAIL2
```

MULTIACCESS

Multiaccess assignment keywords, including:

- [MAXTIMEDIFF](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__MAXTIMEDIFF)
- [MAXPCTDIFF](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__MAXPCTDIFF)

The presence of either of these keywords triggers the
multiaccess process discussed in
[Path building](GUID-2D64BB5C-492B-4596-A850-EA0C1D9309CC.html#GUID-2D64BB5C-492B-4596-A850-EA0C1D9309CC__PATHBUILDING).

MULTIACCESS Keywords

- MAXTIMEDIFF -
  |R| - Maximum time difference (in minutes) allowed between the best I-J path
  and any other I-J path in order to include the other path in the multiaccess
  assignment.
- MAXPCTDIFF - |R|
  - Maximum time difference (relative to the best I-J time) allowed between the
  best I-J path and any other I-J path in order to include the other path in the
  multiaccess assignment.

Example

```
MULTIACCESS MAXTIMEDIFF=3, MAXPCTDIFF=5
; any I-J path within 3 minutes of the best time will be included
; any I-J path within 5 percent of the best time will be included
```

PARAMETERS

General parameters. Keywords include:

- [BUILDPATHS](GUID-D283AD3B-30C9-CA4F-12BE-D4ED04087E41)
- [FREQPERIOD](GUID-0A01E04B-D195-95E0-2799-7F320EA4A719)
- [LISTINPUT](GUID-85726ECB-6923-C204-9240-3AFAA58B5DA3)
- [MAXPATHTIME](GUID-EA310F9B-BC91-D6C7-8407-BCF7E1BECAAC)
- [MAXRUNTIME](GUID-9F90847C-F3C7-2486-4FF6-9F68249BCC98)
- [ONLINE](GUID-9B1A34E8-37CF-2C20-CD23-928C375EA2C3)
- [PATHSTYLE](GUID-B8890340-693A-FD90-99B2-B16167CCD6AC)
- [SEQSIZE](GUID-54D81758-ABCD-EC75-455C-05D664FCA2A1)
- [USERUNTIME](GUID-48AD48A5-F34C-AE06-7EC4-352ECBF7D589)
- [WALKSPEED](GUID-CB3D34B3-C796-425C-092D-4C51E428D406)
- [XYFACTOR](GUID-157BEA8C-CEFD-B02D-904F-0772A1BFAF78)
- [ZONEMSG](GUID-54DD15F3-D6B8-0DA1-1D0C-37FAE3AA2FA5)

PARAMETER Keywords

- BUILDPATHS -
  |K?| - Flag that controls ILOOP processing and path building:

  - True — Default value. Program processes the ILOOP
    and builds paths.
  - False — Program skips the ILOOP and builds no
    paths.
- FREQPERIOD - |KI|
  - Specifies the processed period of the day. Process only uses the lines that
  contain a
  [FREQUENCY](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__FREQUENCY_unique_1) [FREQPERIOD]. The value must be 1-5. Default is 1.
- LISTINPUT - |K?|
  - Flag that controls the printing of control statements:

  - True — Subsequent statements listed to system
    printer file.
  - False — Subsequent statements not listed to system
    printer file.

  Insert this keyword to reduce volume printed by
  suppressing certain types of input.
- MAXPATHTIME
  - |KR| - Perceived time limit for path selection. Program
  does not save paths that exceed this value. Because the path- building routine
  processes many combinations of lines, paths with rather long times will be
  examined. You can reduce computing time by precluded excessively long routes
  from examination. The value may not exceed 655. Default is 120.
- MAXRUNTIME - |KR|
  - Maximum run time length. The program issues a warning for lines with run
  times that exceed this value.
- ONLINE - |KI| -
  Controls the listing of statements to the console during input reading. With a
  value of 1, the program lists every statement. Though useful for debugging,
  this can take excessive time. For large input files, set to a larger value to
  reduce the number of statements.
- PATHSTYLE - |KI|
  - Path selection method used.

  - 0 — Default value. Selects paths by saving the best
    paths to every node for every mode that accesses the node.
  - 1 — Saves only the single best path into a node.
    This method reduces path-building time (one- third or one-quarter the length of
    the default method) and uses less memory. However, this method can produce
    problems if certain mode- to-mode combinations are precluded, or restricted,
    due to transfer penalties.
- SEQSIZE - |KI| -
  Number of cells used in the path-building sequencing table. Changing the value
  might result in somewhat faster pathbuilding times, but that cannot be
  guaranteed. Normally, it should not be revised, unless you are processing
  relatively small network, and
  [MAXPATHTIME](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__MAXPATHTIME) is set rather low. Larger values result in more
  memory use (3 bytes per value). The value must be 2000-32767.
- USERUNTIME -
  |K?| - Flag that controls
  [RUNTIME](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__RUNTIME_unique_1) and
  [RT](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__RT_unique_1) values in
  [LINE](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__LINE_unique_1) control statements:

  - True — Default value. Program implements RUNTIME
    and RT values.
  - False — Program ignores RUNTIME and RT values.
- WALKSPEED - |KR| -
  Speed used for walk links in the nontransit segment of the network. Because
  there is no specific walk mode, the program only uses this value for links with
  a distance but no time. The value must be 0.1-99. Default value is 2.5.
- XYFACTOR - |KR| -
  Conversion factor for coordinate distance to network distance. The program uses
  for
  [LINE](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__LINE_unique_1) and
  [SUPPORT](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__SUPPORT) links when appropriate. The program only applies
  this factor to those situations that follow the input of this keyword. You may
  change the value dynamically. The program automatically sets this factor when
  it reads the input network. The program computes the value by dividing the sum
  of the link coordinate distances by the sum of the link distances. The keyword
  value takes precedence over the network-computed value, even if the keyword is
  input prior to the reading the network.
- ZONEMSG - |KI| -
  Frequency that the system writes zonal timing messages to the console. This
  keyword is relevant only for those who start the system with
  RUNTPP. Specify frequency as number of zones.
  For example, with a value of one, the program writes a message for every zone;
  with a value of 10, the program writes a message for every 10 zones. Larger
  values of
  ZONEMSG
  can reduce running times when running the system in
  console mode. Default value is 1.

The keywords on this statement are all "trigger" keys; you
need not code the control word
PARAMETERS. You can input the values in any order,
and, for most of the keywords, if they appear multiple times, the program uses
the latest value.

Example

```
PARAMETERS MaxRunTime=120 ; flag long lines
MaxPathTime=180 ; no paths greater than 3 hours
WALKSPEED=4.1 ; walk speed in kph
USERUNTIME=n ; ignore LINE RUNTIME and RT values
```

PHASE1

Initial parameters. Keywords include:

- [HWYTIME](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__HWYTIME)
- [LINKDUMP](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__LINKDUMP)
- [MAXNODE](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__MAXNODE)
- [WORKRAM](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__WORKRAM)

PHASE1 Keywords

- HWYTIME - |KS| -
  Input network variable used for the link times when building the transit
  network. The method for obtaining the actual link time depends on the name of
  the variable specified. The program uses the following logic to obtain each
  link’s time:

  ```
  If HWYTIME=SPDCLASS
    if LANES is in the network,
      time = dist/speedtab(lanes,spdclass)
    else time = 0
  Else if HWYTIME=SPEED
    time=distance/speed
  Else if HWYTIME=network variable
    time = variable * 100.
  Else (HWYTIME not specified)
    if TIME is in the network
      time = TIME*100
    else time = 0;
  End if
  ```

  The program maintains the time as an integer value,
  assumed as xx.xx minutes.
- LINKDUMP - |KI| -
  Specifies the number of links to be printed for inspection. Used primarily for
  debugging purposes.
- MAXNODE - |KI| -
  Highest node number in the transit network, if it is to have node numbers
  higher than the input network. The value must be larger than the highest node
  in the input network and less than 32,761.
- WORKRAM
  - |KI| - Amount of RAM initially allocated to certain
  work areas. In most situations, the default is adequate, and if insufficient,
  the program tries to internally adjust it. But some situations may require a
  larger initial allocation. When more initial allocation is needed, the program
  terminates with a message indicating the need to restart with a larger
  allocation. The value must be 10,000-500,000. Default value is 300,000.

The keywords on this statement are all "trigger" keys; you
need not code the control word,
PHASE1 need not be coded. These keywords are valid
only prior to the opening of the input network. Therefore, you must input them
early in the input stream.

Example

```
MAXNODE=22000 HWYTIME=trantime ; increase highest node
PHASE1 MAXNODE=2100
```

PNR

Specifies park-and-ride link generation. Keywords include:

- [CLEAR](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__CLEARPNR)
- [GLOBAL](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__GLOBALPNR)
- [LOTMODE](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__LOTMODE)
- [MAXTIME](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__MAXTIME)
- [MODE](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__MODEPNR)
- [NODE](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__NODEPNR)
- [ONEWAY](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__ONEWAYPNR)
- [SELECT](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__SELECTPNR)
- [TIME](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__TIMEPNR)
- [ZONES](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__ZONESPNR)

PNR Keywords

- CLEAR - |?| - Flag
  that indicates whether to set the global area to all zeroes before any other
  statement processing.

  Reset happens regardless of the location of
  CLEAR in the statement.
- GLOBAL - |?| -
  Flag that indicates whether to set PNR values into the PNR global area.

  When reading the statement, the program sets the values
  from the link global area, and then updates current values based on statement
  keywords. If
  GLOBAL is true, the program updates global
  values from the current values. The global area contains time, cost, oneway,
  distfac, mode, and lotmode. See
  [Using TRNBUILD in CUBE Voyager](GUID-19A9EFF4-3A1C-4082-98F9-DA7D5C9BCF82.html#GUID-19A9EFF4-3A1C-4082-98F9-DA7D5C9BCF82) for notes about the use of
  GLOBAL.
- LOTMODE - |I| -
  Mode assigned to the lot link. The value must not conflict with any transit
  modes being used.
- MAXTIME - |R| -
  Maximum time for any generated zone-to-node links. If a potential link between
  a zone and a PNR node exceeds this value, the program does not connect the zone
  to the node. This is a general parameter; the program only uses the last value
  input. Appropriate values might reduce path-building time in the PNR
  access-development phase.
- MODE - |I| - Mode
  assigned to the zone-to-node support link developed. The value must not
  conflict with any transit modes being used.
- NODE - |IVP| - Node
  to which the program generates an access link from each zone specified in
  [ZONES](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__ZONESPNR) via the PNR access- development process. That process
  builds the best highway-time path from each designated zone to this
  NODE using only links that exist in
  [NETI](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__NETI_unique_3). Normally, NODE is a transit stop node. However, at
  some locations, the NODE might not be a stop node, but merely a drop-off node,
  or the entrance to a parking lot associated with a transit-stop node. To
  accommodate the latter scenario, append a second node to the first
  NODE value (NODE-NODE); the program generates
  an additional support (lot) link between the two nodes. In either case, the
  nodes must exist in the highway network; simply having coordinates for the
  nodes will suffice for generating the lot link, but if the first node does not
  have
  NETI connections, the program cannot generate
  a path to it. In the two-node option, the first node should not be a transit
  stop node, and the second node should be. The program will issue warning
  messages if the inputs violate these rules. The program obtains the lot-link
  parameters from the statement’s
  [TIME](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__TIMEPNR),
  [ONEWAY](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__ONEWAYPNR), and
  [LOTMODE](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__LOTMODE) values. The program internally maintains each
  zone-to-node link and each generated lot link as a support link.

  Bentley recommends that you enter lot links as separate
  support links rather than appending a second node and having the program
  generate a lot link.
- ONEWAY
  - |?| - Flag that indicates whether to configure
  generated (zone- to-node and lot) links as one-way.
- SELECT - |?| -
  Flag that indicates whether to limit access-link generation, possibly speeding
  the process:

  - True — Program limits access-link generation to the
    zones that appear in the select array (product of
    [SELECT](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__SELECT) I and/or J). If the
    SELECT statement specifies no I or J, the
    select array selects all zones for I or J.
  - False — Program generates access links for all
    zones.
- TIME - |R| - Time
  assigned to the lot link.
- ZONES - |IVP| -
  Zones that the PNR access development process connects to the
  [NODE](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__NODEPNR). The program builds a set of highway-time paths from
  each of the zones. For zones that can reach the
  [NODE](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__NODEPNR) within the
  [MAXTIME](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__MAXTIME), the program generates a
  [SUPPLINK](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__SUPPLINK) between the zone and the
  [NODE](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__NODEPNR). The program assigns the generated link’s mode from
  MODE and its time from the path.

After reading any input PNR statements, the program
automatically tries to generate PNR access links. However, you need not input
PNR statements to enter PNR-access and lot links in the transit network. You
can input these links directly via SUPPORT statements.

Example

```
PNR MODE=12 LOTMODE=13 ONEWAY=Y MAXTIME=30 GLOBAL=Y
; establish general global values for subsequent PNR's
PNR NODE=8001 ZONES=1-15,48,125,138-173
PNR node=9001-10001 ZONES=16-47,358
```

REPORT

Report requests. Keywords and sub-keywords include:

- [CAPACITY](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__CAPACITY_unique_1)
- [LINES](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__LINES)
- [LINESTRING](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__LINESTRING)
- [LINEVOL](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__LINEVOL)

  - [LINESORT](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__LINESORT)
  - [MODES](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__MODESLINEVOL)
  - [STOPSONLY](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__STOPSONLYLINEVOL)
- [LINKVOL](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__LINKVOL)

  - [FULL](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__FULL)
  - [MODES](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__MODESLINKVOL)
  - [STOPSONLY](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__STOPSONLYLINKVOL)
- [NODEVOL](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__NODEVOL)

  - [MODES](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__MODESNODEVOL)
- [RUNTIMEADJ](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__RUNTIMEADJ)
- [SPEED](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__SPEEDREPORT)

REPORT Keywords

- CAPACITY - |?| -
  Flag that indicates whether to produce a report of the capacities stored in the
  input highway network’s SPDCAP table.
- LINES - |SV| - Sort
  order of transit-line summary report. Indicate fields to sort on or specify
  "Order" to present report in original input order. Report fields include: Name,
  Mode, Frequency, Time, Dist, Speed, Boarding and XFER volumes.
- LINESTRING - |S|
  - String mask for lines included in the line-strings report.

  The program reports line strings in a three-column
  format: node accum\_time accum\_dist. Rows with empty nodes indicate an embedded
  parameter (speed, time, rt, etc.) The report prints the lines side-by-side to
  reduce print volume, but large networks can generate a very large report if
  many lines are selected.

  Enter a mask comprised of characters, ?, #, and \*:

  - # indicates any digit
  - ? indicates any character
  - \* forces a match.

  To include \* or - in the mask, enclose the mask within
  " ". The program selects the number of characters equal to the lesser of the
  length of the mask or the name. For example, to see all lines, enter a single
  ?. To report lines that begin with the letter A and have a 3 in the fourth
  position, enter A??3.
- LINEVOL - |?| -
  Flag that indicates whether to produce line-volume report showing line
  boardings, volumes, and exits resulting from trip assignment.

  The report lists each line along with a summary of the
  line’s boardings, passenger distance, and passenger hours. The summaries depend
  on the assignment options. The line-node listing shows all the trip activity
  (Boards, Volumes, Exits) at each stop node.
- LINEVOL -
  LINESORT - |?| - Flag that indicates order of
  line-volume report:

  - True — Write report sorted by line name
  - False — Write report in input order
- LINEVOL -
  MODES - |IP| - Transit modes included in
  line-volume report. If not specified, report includes all transit modes.
- LINEVOL -
  STOPSONLY - |?| - Flag that indicates whether
  to restrict the line-volume report to stop-to-stop links only:

  - True — Line-volume report only includes stop-to-
    stop links; the report does not consider intermediate nodes to be link nodes.
    If the program does not accumulate boards and exits during assignment, the
    program automatically sets this keyword to true.
  - False — Line-volume report includes all links.
- LINKVOL
  - |?| - Flag that indicates whether to produce
  link-volume report showing link volumes, boards, and exits resulting from trip
  assignment. Report only includes links with values unless you set
  FULL to true.
- LINKVOL -
  FULL - |?| - Flag that indicates whether to
  include all links—even zero-volume links—in the link-volume report:

  - True — Include all links.
  - False — Default value. Include only used links.
- LINKVOL -
  MODES - |IP| - Transit modes included in
  link-volume report. If not specified, report includes all transit modes.
- LINKVOL -
  STOPSONLY - |?| - Flag that indicates whether
  to restrict the link-volume report to stop-to-stop links only:

  - True — Link-volume report only includes stop-to-
    stop links; the report does not consider intermediate nodes to be link nodes
  - False — Link-volume report includes all links.
- NODEVOL - |?| - Flag
  that indicates whether to produce node-volume report showing boarding and
  exiting activity at nodes. The program sorts the report by node, mode, and
  line. The report provides totals at each node and for the network.
- NODEVOL -
  MODES - |IP| - Transit modes included in
  node-volume report. If not specified, report includes all transit modes.
- RUNTIMEADJ - |?|
  - Flag that indicates whether to produce report showing network time versus
  runtime for lines with a coded
  [RUNTIME](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__RUNTIME_unique_1):

  - True — Default value. Produce report.
  - False — Do not produce report.

  Note: The program always produces this report for lines with
  a run time that exceeds
  [MAXRUNTIME](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__MAXRUNTIME).
- SPEED - |?| -
  Flag that indicates whether to produce a report of the speeds stored in the
  input highway network’s SPDCAP table.

The
REPORT statement specifies which reports the
program prints and suppresses. Some reports are automatically suppressed if the
program does not complete trip assignment. If you restrict assignment (do not
accumulate all volumes, boards, or exits), some reports will be incomplete.

Note: Some reports can be quite voluminous. Example

```
REPORT CAPACITY=n SPDCODE=y RUNTIMEADJ=y
REPORT LINKVOL=y FULL=y ;list all links in the network.
REPORT LINEVOL=y, LINESORT=y, STOPSONLY=n
REPORT LINES= Name, Mode, ORDER;
REPORT LINESTRING=MU?## ;report all MUNI numbered lines
REPORT NODEVOL=y MODES=1,3-7,10
```

SEGLIMITS

Limits nontransit travel segments during path building (not
during network construction). Keywords include:

- [MAXDIST](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__MAXDIST)
- [MAXTIME](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__MAXTIMESEGLIMITS)
- [MODES](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__MODESSEGLIMITS)

SEGLIMITS Keywords

- MAXDIST - |I| -
  Maximum distance (in 1/100 miles) allowed in a segment.
- MAXTIME -
  |R| - Maximum time (in minutes) allowed in a segment.
- MODES
  - |IP| - Modes that comprise the segment.

During path building, some paths may tend to use a
successive series of nontransit links. While each link itself has an acceptable
time or distance, the sum of successive link times may not be acceptable. This
may be especially true for walk links. For example, you might consider a walk
time of 15 minutes to be acceptable. If the network connects two 15-minute walk
links, the path could use the links successively and generate a 30-minute walk
segment. A SEGLIMITS statement can preclude this from
happening. You may specify up to 20
SEGLIMITS statements. Each statement contains the
restricting modes, and either a
MAXDIST or
MAXTIME limit. If the statement specifies both
MAXTIME and
MAXDIST, the program generates two segment limits.

Example

```
SEGLIMITS MODES=101,13 MAXTIME=22.5
; Any combination of mode 101 and mode 13 will be restricted to 22.5 minutes
SEGLIMITS MODES=212 MAXDIST=600 ; No mode 212 link > 6 miles
```

SELECT

Zone and miscellaneous selection. Keywords include:

- [ACCESSMODES](GUID-A2D96680-E6F1-92C7-AA2F-4E578B2B1150)
- [I](GUID-994B7D1A-C4DC-E660-4D49-E499022A8626)
- [J](GUID-34C82FC3-6562-C336-3FB6-53C13412351B)
- [IJ](GUID-77A7BF04-3C04-2C0F-72FA-CE0340AF9788)
- [SKIPMODES](GUID-284DC896-D943-D1DE-00EC-C83731420954)
- [TRACE](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__TRACE_unique_1)

SELECT Keywords

- ACCESSMODES -
  |KIVP| - Nontransit modes that the program may use for the outbound link from a
  zone when building paths.

  Use to specify which modes may be used for initial
  access. For example, if the zone has both walk- and drive-mode outbound links,
  you can restrict path development to just one of those types by specifying the
  desired mode with
  ACCESSMODES. Specified values must be valid
  nontransit modes.
- I
  - |KIVP| - Origin zones to be processed.

  If not specified, the program processes all I zones.
- J - |KIVP| -
  Destination zones to be processed.

  If not specified, the program processes all J zones.
- IJ - |Ks| -
  Specific zone-to-zone paths be reported. The expression may include any
  combination of I and J. The program reports only processed I-J pairs (that is,
  origins and destinations specified in I and J).
- SKIPMODES -
  |KIVP| - Modes not included in path building.

  Use to preclude a certain type of access.
- TRACE - |Ks| -
  Zone-to-zone paths to be reported. The expression may include any combination
  of I, J and BOARDS. BOARDS is the number of transit boardings made during the
  path. If the program traces a path and statements request level-of-service
  matrices, the program also lists LOS values following the path.

Example

```
SELECT I=1-20,55,37-50,83, J=1-99,512
SELECT TRACE=( (I=1-10 && J=50-75,387 && BOARDS > 2) ||
(J=1-10 && I=50-75,387 && BOARDS > 2) )
SELECT SKIPMODES=12 , IJ=( (i=1-5 & j=100-120) || (i=100-120 & j=1-5) )
SELECT ACCESSMODES=11-16; all zone connect modes compete
```

SUPPLINK

Direct input of nontransit links. Keywords include:

- [DIST](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__DISTSUPPLINK)
- [MODE](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__MODESUPPLINK)
- [NODES](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__NODESSUPPLINK)
- [ONEWAY](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__ONEWAYSUPPLINK)
- [SPEED](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__SPEEDSUPPLINK)
- [TIME](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__TIMESUPPLINK)
- [XYALL](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__XYALL)
- [XYFAC](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__XYFAC)

This statement is compatible with CUBE Base transit line
editing, whereas
[SUPPORT](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__SUPPORT) is not totally compatible. Bentley recommends using
this statement for single links rather than using
SUPPORT. SUPPLINK is a subset of
SUPPORT; SUPPLINK does not support some of the
SUPPORT keywords. This section lists the supported
keywords.

The program writes
[FILEO](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__FILEO_unique_7)[SUPPORTO](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__SUPPORTO) records as
SUPPLINK
records.

SUPPLINK keywords

- DIST - |I| -
  Distance (in 100th of units) to be assigned to the link.
- MODE - |I| -
  Mode assigned to the link. The value may not conflict with transit modes being
  used.
- NODES - |IP| -
  Nodes of a support (nontransit) link. The link must have a valid distance. See
  [Logic for obtaining link distance](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__LOGICFOROBTAININGLINKDISTANCE) for a description of the
  logic used to obtain the distance.
  N is an alternate form for this keyword.
- ONEWAY - |?|
  - Flag that indicates whether to save link in one or both directions:

  - True — Save the generated links as one-way links
    (a-b only).
  - False —
    Default value. Save the generated
    links as two- way links (a-b and b-a).
- SPEED - |R| -
  Speed used for computing the link time.
- TIME - |R| -
  Travel time for the link.
- XYALL - |?| - Flag
  that indicates whether to obtain link distances from coordinates:

  - True — Compute link distances directly from the
    coordinates, even if the link exists in the input network.
  - False —
    Default value. Determine distance
    from the input network if the links in the input
    [NETI](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__NETI_unique_3) network, otherwise use distance specified
    by SUPPLINK[DIST](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__DISTSUPPLINK).
- XYFAC - |?| - Flag
  that indicates whether to obtain link distances from coordinates if other
  methods fail:

  - True — Default
    value. Compute link distances from the node coordinates if the other
    distance-obtaining processes fail. See
    [Logic for obtaining link distance](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__LOGICFOROBTAININGLINKDISTANCE).
  - False — Generate a fatal error if other
    distance-obtaining processes fail (that is, if
    [XYALL](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__XYALL)=F and the link is not in the input network and
    SUPPLINK[DIST](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__DISTSUPPLINK) is not defined).

When a
SUPPLINK statement contains both
TIME and
SPEED, the program sets link time to
TIME rather than calculating link time from
DISTANCE and
SPEED.

Example

```
SUPPLINK MODE=13, SPEED=60, N=21-22 DIST=300
SUPPLINK NODES=21-22 MODE=15 DIST=500 TIME=20
```

SUPPORT

Direct input of nontransit links. Keywords include:

- [CLEAR](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__CLEARSUPPORT)
- [DIST](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__DISTSUPPORT)
- [GLOBAL](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__GLOBALSUPPORT)
- [LISTLINK](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__LISTLINKSUPPORT)
- [MODES](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__MODESSUPPORT)
- [NODES](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__NODESSUPPORT)
- [ONEWAY](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__ONEWAYSUPPORT)

SUPPORT Keywords

- CLEAR - |?| -
  Flag that indicates whether to set the global area to all zeroes before any
  other statement processing.

  Occurs no matter where
  CLEAR appears on the statement.
- DIST - |I| -
  Distance assigned to a link generated in a node string, if the string generates
  only one link.
- GLOBAL - |?| -
  Flag that indicates whether to update the support global area with values from
  the
  SUPPORT statement:

  - True — The program updates global area values with
    the current values set in the SUPPORT statement.
  - False — The program retains values in the support
    global area.

  The global area contains
  DIST, LISTLINK, MODES, ONEWAY, SPEED, XYALL,
  and
  XYFAC.

  Note: Global values are not compatible with transit-network
  editing in CUBE Base. Therefore, Bentley recommends that you not use global
  values.
- LISTLINK -
  |?| - Flag that indicates whether to list all the generated links. Use
  primarily for debugging.
- MODES - |IV| -
  Modes assigned to the generated links on this statement. The values must not
  conflict with transit modes being used.
- NODES - || -
  String of nodes (links) used as support (nontransit) links. Each link in the
  string must have a valid distance. See
  [Logic for obtaining link distance](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__LOGICFOROBTAININGLINKDISTANCE).

  Within a node string, the program generates a link from
  each positive node to the next positive node in the string. Negative nodes
  indicate intermediate nodes that the program only uses for computing distance
  and time. For example, if you input 100 -101 -102 103 104. the program
  generates links 100-103 and 103-104. The program computes the distance and time
  for link 100-103 from links 100-101, 101-102, and 102-103.

  Generated links are valid for the modes specified in
  [MODES](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__MODESSUPPORT). You can input the same link on different
  SUPPORT
  statements with different distance and time if you
  specify different modes.

  A node string terminates at the end of the
  SUPPORT
  statement or at the next keyword. Input another node
  string with another
  NODES
  keyword.
- ONEWAY - || -
  Flag that indicates whether to save link in one or both directions:

  - True — Save the generated links as one-way links
    (a-b only).
  - False —
    Default value. Save the generated
    links as two- way links (a-b and b-a).
- SPEED - |R| -
  Speed used to compute the link times for all generated links.
- XYALL - || - Flag that
  indicates whether to obtain link distances from coordinates:

  - True — Compute link distances directly from the
    coordinates, even if the link does exist in the input network.
  - False — Default
    value. Determine distance from the input network if the links in the
    input
    [NETI](GUID-E6FA5258-A511-FF90-B8E4-C974EADB489D) network, otherwise use distance specified by
    [SUPPORT](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__SUPPORT)[DIST](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__DISTSUPPORT).
- XYFAC - || - Flag
  that indicates whether to obtain link distances from coordinates if other
  methods fail:

  - True — Compute link distances from the node
    coordinates if the other distance-obtaining processes fail. See
    [Logic for obtaining link distance](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__LOGICFOROBTAININGLINKDISTANCE).
  - False — Generate a fatal error if other
    distance-obtaining processes fail (that is, if
    [XYALL](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__XYALL)=F and the link is not in the input network and
    [SUPPORT](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__SUPPORT)[DIST](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__DISTSUPPORT) is not defined).

Logic for
obtaining link distance

- If
  DIST specified (or set in global area) and
  there is only one link in a string, then set distance = DIST.
- Else if
  XYALL=Y, then:

  - If nodes have valid coordinates, compute distance
    from the coordinates
  - Else generate link error
- Else XYALL=N so the program
  computes the distance using the first successful method:

  1. From A-B link in network
  2. From B-A link in network
  3. If
     XYFAC=Y, compute distance from the
     coordinates
  4. Generate link error
- End if

Example

```
SUPPORT MODES=13, SPEED=60, N=21-22 N=21-22-23 GLOBAL=Y DIST=3
SUPPORT N=21 -22 -23 24 N=24-25 GLOBAL=N CLEAR=Y MODES=11 XYFAC=Y
SUPPORT N=21 -22 -23 24 MODES=13-15 DIST=5 SPEED=0
```

TRIPS

Specify trip processing. Keywords and sub-keywords include:

- [MATRIX](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__MATRIX)

  - [ASSIGN](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__ASSIGN), with sub-keywords
    [VOLUMES](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__VOLUMES),
    [BOARDS](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__BOARDS),
    [EXITS](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__EXITS),
    [OLINKS](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__OLINKS)

TRIPS keywords

- MATRIX - |S| -
  [FILEI MATI](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__MATI_unique_4) file used to obtain trip matrix. The program
  uses this trip matrix as a filter during path processing: The program only
  processes paths for zonal pairs for which their are trips.

  You may specify the file name using two methods:

  - MI.#.m —
    Preferred method. Program obtains
    file name from the FILEI MATI[#] value.
  - MI.m — Program obtains file name from the one MATI
    file specified.

  For either method,
  m specifies the name or number of the
  processed matrix. For non–TP+ input files, you must specify the desired matrix
  by number.

  If the subkeyword
  [ASSIGN](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__ASSIGN) is true, the program assigns trips to the network.
  If the subkeyword is not coded, there is no zonal filtering.
- MATRIX -
  ASSIGN - |?| - Flag that indicates whether to
  assign TRIPS matrix values to the network. When set to true, program sets all
  its subkeywords to true by default.

  ASSIGN has several subkeywords:

  - VOLUMES
    - |?| - Flag that indicates whether to accumulate
    link volumes during assignment.
  - BOARDS - |?| -
    Flag that indicates whether to accumulate separate boarding volumes for each
    stop node.
  - EXITS |?| - Flag
    that indicates whether to accumulate separate exit volumes for each stop node.
  - OLINKS - |IPV| -
    Required links in a trip. A trip must contain the specified links for the
    program to assign that trip.

    Specify one or more required links as node pairs.
    You may enter a link may be entered in both directions, or you may enter a
    negative B node to indicate selection in either direction (A-B or B- A). The
    program does not check if the links exist before processing. You may specify
    support links. You cannot specify modes or lines.

    Link nodes must be adjacent if on a line.
    Thus, OLINKS=200-400 would be invalid if
    [LINE
    NODES](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__NODES_unique_2) is
    100, 200, -300, 400, because
    200
    does not connect directly to
    400. But,
    OLINKS=200-300 would be valid.

    If a path segment consists of combined lines, and
    only some lines in the segment use a selected link, the program restricts
    assignment to trips assigned to those lines.

Without a
TRIPS control statement, the program does not
process any trip matrix. Trip processing restricts paths to only those zonal
pairs with actual trips. When the program encounters the
MATRIX keyword, the program sets the default
values of
ASSIGN and its subkeywords to false. If the
program also encounters ASSIGN, the program sets the default values of its
subkeywords to the same value as
ASSIGN. If ASSIGN is set to true, the program
observes any settings of other subkeywords. If ASSIGN is set to false, the
program ignores its subkeywords. Only set the values of ASSIGN subkeywords
differently than the ASSIGN value if you have insufficient memory to accumulate
all data at one time.

Example

```
TRIPS MATRIX=MI.1.3, ASSIGN=y, BOARDS=n,EXITS=n
TRIPS MATRIX=?14.1 ; matrix 1 from xxxx14.DAT -- MINUTP notation
TRIPS MATRIX=MI.1.3, ASSIGN=Y, OLINKS=5000-5001,5100-5101,5101-5100
TRIPS MATRIX=MI.1.3, ASSIGN=Y, OLINKS=5000-5001,5100--5101 ; same
```

XFERGEN

Generate transfer support links. Keywords include:

- [MODE](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__MODEXFERGEN)
- [MAXDIST](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__MAXDISTXFERGEN)

Given this statement, the program generates support links of
the specified modes using only
[NETI](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__NETI_unique_3) links. The program builds paths from each stop node to
all other stop nodes within the specified distances. The program generates a
distance for the support link and computes the time from
[WALKSPEED](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__WALKSPEED). The program generates one support link for each
connection. For example, if a path from stop 100 to stop 200 uses four
[NETI](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__NETI_unique_3) links, the program generates one support link from 100
to 200.

XFERGEN Keywords

- MODE - |I| -
  Mode assigned to the generated links. The value must be a nontransit mode.
- MAXDIST -
  |RV255| - Maximum distance to search for a stop node for the mode. The
  keyword’s index [i] indicates the mode.

Example: Suppose stop 100 services modes 1 and 3, stop 200
services mode 3 and 6, and the stops are 50 distance units apart. If MAXDIST[3]=25 and
MAXDIST[6]=50, the program will connect
these stops. The largest
MAXDIST of any of the serviced nodes defines the
limit for a connection. If you use multiple
XFERGEN statements or repeat a
MAXDIST keyword, the program uses the last value.
A typical statement might be:

```
XFERGEN MODE=11, MAXDIST=10*33, MAXDIST[8]=50
; allow longer walk to Mode 8
```

Use care when specifying
MAXDIST; you could generate more links than
TRNBUILD can handle. The link paths will pass through centroids, if that is the
best path between nodes. To examine the generated links, use a
[SUPPORTO](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__SUPPORTO) statement to induce the program to write a file of
[SUPPLINK](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__SUPPLINK) records.

XY

Insert or revise coordinates. Keywords and sub-keywords
include:

- [NODE](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__NODEXY)

  - [X](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__X)
  - [Y](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__Y)
- [XY](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__XYXY)

XY Keywords

- NODE
  - Node for which the statement defines coordinates. The
  value must be between 1 and
  [MAXNODE](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__MAXNODE) (or highest node in the network).
- NODE -
  X - X-coordinate for
  NODE. The value must be 1-2147483647.
- NODE -
  Y - Y-coordinate for
  NODE. The value must be 1-2147483647.
- XY - Vector of
  coordinates for one or more nodes.

  Use this keyword as alternate to the
  NODE keyword. Indicate the first node in the
  index and set the keyword value to pairs of comma- separated coordinates
  (X-coordinate, Y- coordinate); uses spaces to separate additional pairs of
  coordinates. The program automatically increments the node for additional
  coordinates.

Example

```
XY NODE=137, X=234123, Y=327500, NODE=138, X=234123, Y=327510
XY XY[137]= 234123,327500 234123,327510 ;Same as above
```

ZONEACCESS

Zonal access development (not PNR) parameters. Keywords
include:

- [GENERATE](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__GENERATE_unique_1)

  - [DIRECTION](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__DIRECTION_unique_1)
  - [LIST](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__LIST_unique_3)
  - [MAXDIST](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__MAXDISTZONEACCESS)
  - [MAXLINKS](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__MAXLINKS)
  - [MAXSTOPS](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__MAXSTOPS)
  - [MODE](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__MODEZONEACCESS)
  - [SELECT](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__SELECTZONEACCESS)
- [LINK](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__LINKZONEACCESS)

  - [DIST](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__DISTZONEACCESS)
  - [MODE](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__MODELINKZONEACCESS)
  - [ONEWAY](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__ONEWAYZONEACCESS)

ZONEACCESS Keywords

- GENERATE - |?| -
  Flag that indicates whether to generate zonal-access support links.
- GENERATE
  -
  DIRECTION - |I| - Direction of all
  zonal-access links:

  - 1 — Program generates links from zone to node
    (origin access) only.
  - 2 — Program generates links from node to zone
    (destination access) only.
  - 3 — Default value. Program generates both origin and
    destination links.
- GENERATE -
  LIST - |?| - Flag that indicates whether to
  list generated links as they are generated.

  Useful for debugging, the list shows the zone, node,
  distance, time, and accessible modes at the node. Because this list could be a
  rather, Bentley recommends generating the list only with small networks, or in
  conjunction with
  [SELECT](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__SELECTZONEACCESS). You can also use the
  [FILEO
  SUPPORTO](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__SUPPORTO) statement to write a file with these links.
- GENERATE -
  MAXDIST - |IV255\*| - Maximum distance of a
  zonal access link between a zone and an access node.

  You may enter a distance for each transit mode. The
  value must be 0-500. Default value is 33.
- GENERATE
  -
  MAXLINKS - |I| - Maximum number of links
  searched beyond the origin zone during zonal-access path building.

  You only need to restrict the path builder if you
  developed the input network with a specific coding scheme that requires limited
  searching. In most cases,
  MAXDIST
  will help to reduce path-building time, but a reasonable
  value for
  MAXLINKS can also possibly reduce
  path-building time.

  The value must be 1-30. Default value is 20.
- GENERATE
  -
  MAXSTOPS -|IV255\*| - Maximum number of access
  links allowed for any zone to each mode.

  The value must be 0-20. Default value is 5.
- GENERATE -
  MODE
  -|I| - Mode assigned to the generated links.

  You must code this keyword. The value may not conflict
  with transit modes being used.
- GENERATE -
  SELECT - |?| - Flag that indicates whether to
  limit link generation to selected zones.

  - True — Program limits zonal-access link generation
    to the zones in the array specified with the
    [SELECT](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__SELECT) control statement and
    [I](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__ISELECT) and
    [J](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__JSELECT) keywords.

    Note: If the
    SELECT
    statement specifies no I or J, the array specifies
    all zones for I or J.
  - False — Program processes all zones.

  Setting to true can possibly speed up zonal-access link
  generation.
- LINK
  -|IV| - Links accessed during zonal-access development.

  The program adds the specified links as support links
  to the system, and gives them the appropriate distance, mode, and time. Do not
  include any specified links in
  [SUPPORT](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__SUPPORT) statements.
- LINK
  -
  DIST -|I| - Distance assigned to all the
  specified links. If DIST is not coded, program treats link’s distance as 0.
- LINK -
  MODE -|I| - Mode assigned to the specified
  links. If not specified, defaults to the mode specified by GENERATE[MODE](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__MODEZONEACCESS).
- LINK - ONEWAY -|?| - Flag that
  indicates direction of specified links:

  - True — Specified links are one-way.
  - False —
    Default value. Specified links
    are two-way.

The
ZONEACCESS statement controls access development.
During access development, the program builds minimum-distance paths from
selected origin zones to transit stop nodes. Use this statement to specify
zonal-access generation and to specify special zonal- access links. The
functions are independent: Even if the statement does not generate zonal
access, the statement will add specified zonal-access links to the network.
Bentley recommends using separate statements for each purpose.

During access generation, the program treats each link’s
A-node as an equivalent stop node to the transit modes that stop at the link’s
B-node. The program then generates a zonal-access link directly from the origin
zone to the link’s A-node. To use the statement properly, the transit stop at
the link’s B-node should be inaccessible to the access-path-building routine.
That is usually the case, when you use access links to isolate the
mode-of-arrival at a node. However, violating this criteria is not an error; it
could be what you intend.

The longest
MAXDIST and the value of
MAXLINKS restrict the access-generation path
builder. (The program will not build a path further than the highest
MAXDIST from the zone, nor will the path traverse
more than
MAXLINKS links from the zone to reach a node.)
After completing the path building, the program ranks all accessible nodes
(stop nodes and/or
ZONEACCESS LINK A-nodes) by their distance from
the zone. Next, the program generates access links according to the
restrictions of the
MAXDIST and
MAXSTOPS values. Finally, the program enters the
generated access links
SUPPLINK statements, according to the value of
DIRECTION.

Example

```
ZONEACCESS generate=y,maxstops=1,2,3*4,6,7,8,10, maxdist=10*150 mode=11
ZONEACCESS link=43-22,43-40,MODE=14 dist=050
```

**Parent topic:** [TRNBUILD
program](GUID-C2CBB4E1-D0A0-480D-AD04-E66622416C75.html)

|
|  |
|
|  |
