# Introduction to Generation program

The Generation program processes zonal data according to
specified expressions, and generates arrays of productions and attractions for
up to twenty purposes. There are no default processes; it is your
responsibility to specify what is to be accomplished. Usually, you use the
Generation program to produce trip end data files (productions and attractions)
for use in a trip distribution model.

Generation is a direct application of Matrix. There are a
few control statements and keywords in the Matrix control set that are not
valid in a Generation application. It is the user’s responsibility to program
the logic, computations, and output; very little is assumed by the program.
However, the capability is nearly open-ended. There may be up to twenty trip
purposes estimated in a single application.

The program processes within an overall origin zone loop
controlled by the variable named I. To make things a little more meaningful to
some users, I may alternatively be referenced as Z. (A companion variable Z is
set to I every time I is changed internally; I and Z can not be revised by the
user). The Generation program has two processing phases and stacks: the normal
stack (ILOOP) that begins with the first stack statement, and an optional
ADJUST stack, which begins with the statements following the PHASE=ADJUST
statement. The I-loop processes only the normal stack statements; it does not
proceed beyond the PHASE=ADJUST statement. The ADJUST stack is processed one
time only – after the I-loop is completed. Its purpose is to provide
capabilities to adjust and/or balance final production and attraction totals.

Productions and attractions are to be computed for each
zone; they are referred to as P and A, respectively. There may be up to twenty
Ps and twenty As for each zone. The computed Ps and As are stored into arrays
and must be referenced with array notation. The arrays are doubly dimensioned.
Only the first index (purpose) is required; the second index (zone) is
optional. The zonal index will be set to I if it is not specified. There is
very little need to use a JLOOP, but if one is used, it is suggested that P and
A references within the JLOOP contain both indices. Any attempt to use an
invalid index will result in a fatal message. The lower limit for each index is
0; the upper limits are MAXPURPS and ZONES. P[1]=ZI.1.POP indicates that the
productions for purpose 1 for the current I zone are to be obtained from the
ZDATI[1] array named POP. A more detailed expression would be P[1][I] =
ZI.1.POP[I], but such detail is not necessary.

When the ILOOP phase is completed, the program fills in the
[0] row and [0] columns for the P and A arrays; row and column 0 cells are set
to the marginal values. The statements in the ADJUST stack can reference index
[0] to obtain row and/or column totals. The COMP functions, PTOT(#) and ATOT(#)
can also be used at any time to compute the totals for purpose #. There is a
significant difference when referencing P and A in COMP statements in the
ADJUST stack. In ILOOP, COMP P and A is processed for a single zone index (I);
in ADJUST, a COMP P and A causes processing for all zones in that P or A. This
is to simplify the final adjusting process. However, double indexing on the
right side of the equal sign can set the process to compute for only that
specific zone.

It should be noted that IF/ENDIF, LOOP/ENDLOOP, and
JLOOP/ENDJOOP blocks and any GOTOs may not span a PHASE. The program will treat
such conditions as errors.

Example

```
A[1] = 1 ; sets only 1 cell
P[1] = A[1] ; sets only 1 cell
/* Adjustment Phase — Set A[1] to total to P[1] total
Move A[1] to P[1] (maybe NHB)
fac = ptot(1) / atot(1) a[1]=fac * a[1] ; would be the same */
PHASE=ADJUST
A[1] = P[1][0] / A[1][0] * A[1]
P[1] = A[1]
```

The FILEO PAO keyword is used to write the computed P and A
values to file records.

**Parent topic:** [Generation](GUID-54C1F1F6-DC14-4546-A9BB-34882ACBE6C7.html)

|
|  |
|
|  |
