# Count preprocessing with SLCODE

The
[SLCODE](GUID-33A3AB6F-E1EB-4F2C-911C-6E70894ED1C2.html)
parameter tells the
Analyst Drive program to preprocess the screenline
files according to the code value. Using this option will create a separate
count file for each OD matrix to be estimated, and so the optimization can be
performed for a single matrix at a time as opposed to an aggregated estimation.
The key benefit of this method is that the estimation should perform better
than an aggregate method because there are essentially fewer variables per data
point (since we are essentially creating more data points by preprocessing) to
be optimized. On the other hand, this method works on the assumption that the
volume proportions before and after the estimation should be equal, which may
not necessarily be true.

To use the
[SLCODE](GUID-33A3AB6F-E1EB-4F2C-911C-6E70894ED1C2.html)
parameter, the user must provide an input ICP file for each matrix to be
estimated. The
[SLCODE](GUID-33A3AB6F-E1EB-4F2C-911C-6E70894ED1C2.html) is a
sequence of numbers which tell the program which class matrices/ICPs belong to
which screenline. The
[SLCODE](GUID-33A3AB6F-E1EB-4F2C-911C-6E70894ED1C2.html) is a
sequential series of two number sets. The first set of numbers tell the program
the first and last number matrix that the first screenline file corresponds to;
the second set of two numbers are the first and last matrix that the second
screenline file corresponds to, and so on. Some examples are given below to
help show how to determine the
[SLCODE](GUID-33A3AB6F-E1EB-4F2C-911C-6E70894ED1C2.html)
value.

•
SLCODE Example 1 — If we had four matrices to
estimate with a single screenline file, then we want four preprocessed
screenline files from a single initial screenline file. In this case, the first
matrix to be estimated from the first and only screenline file would be 1 and
the last matrix to be estimated by it would be 4 and so we arrive at the
[SLCODE](GUID-33A3AB6F-E1EB-4F2C-911C-6E70894ED1C2.html) of
14.

•
SLCODE Example 2 — If we had five matrices to
estimate and two screenline files then our
[SLCODE](GUID-33A3AB6F-E1EB-4F2C-911C-6E70894ED1C2.html)
value must contain four sequential numbers (two for the first screenline file,
two for the second). If the first screenline file corresponded to the 1st, 2nd
and 3rd matrices then the first matrix to be estimated using this screenline
file is matrix 1 and the last to be estimated using this screenline file is
matrix 3 giving 13 for the first two numbers of the
[SLCODE](GUID-33A3AB6F-E1EB-4F2C-911C-6E70894ED1C2.html). The
second screenline file corresponds to the 4th and 5th matrices, so the first
matrix number to be estimated using the second screenline file is 4 and the
last is 5. This gives 45 as the last two numbers of the
[SLCODE](GUID-33A3AB6F-E1EB-4F2C-911C-6E70894ED1C2.html)
parameter, and so we find the
[SLCODE](GUID-33A3AB6F-E1EB-4F2C-911C-6E70894ED1C2.html)value would be 1345.

•
SLCODE Example 3
— If we had eight matrices and four screenline files such
that the first screenline file corresponded to the 1st matrix then the first
and the last matrix to be estimated with the first screenline file is 1, and in
this case the two-digit
[SLCODE](GUID-33A3AB6F-E1EB-4F2C-911C-6E70894ED1C2.html)
portion is given by 11. Now, if the second screenline file corresponded to the
2nd, 3rd, 4th and 5th matrices (25), the third screenline file corresponded to
the 6th and 7th matrices (67), and the fourth screenline file corresponded to
the 8th matrix (88) then the
[SLCODE](GUID-33A3AB6F-E1EB-4F2C-911C-6E70894ED1C2.html)would be 11256788.

The
[SLCODE](GUID-33A3AB6F-E1EB-4F2C-911C-6E70894ED1C2.html)
parameter can be used to estimate up to nine matrices from a single (or more)
count set(s). It cannot be used in conjunction with the
[ICPARRAY](GUID-3C98976F-C934-4326-B74F-6BC80466E726.html)
and
[SLARRAY](GUID-BCC50533-1E29-4B78-8262-D21B607CD908.html)parameters.

**Parent topic:**  [Estimating multiple
matrices with fewer data sets](GUID-78D34A5A-6402-4077-B61E-C493F293AA92.html)

|
|  |
|
|  |
