# FAQ - TrnBuild

- [How does TrnBuild calculate fares?](GUID-27E5B508-CEE2-4818-A030-6DE50E733260.html#GUID-27E5B508-CEE2-4818-A030-6DE50E733260__TRNBUILDCALCULATEFARES)
- [How can I obtain farelink fares?](GUID-27E5B508-CEE2-4818-A030-6DE50E733260.html#GUID-27E5B508-CEE2-4818-A030-6DE50E733260__OBTAINFARELINKFARES)
- [Why is the total number of trips reported by the TrnBuild module
  less than the input trip matrix total?](GUID-27E5B508-CEE2-4818-A030-6DE50E733260.html#GUID-27E5B508-CEE2-4818-A030-6DE50E733260__TOTALNUMBERTRIPSREPORTED)

How does TrnBuild
calculate fares?

TrnBuild computes fares by
accumulating boarding fares and xfer fares into the MODEFARE variable (see
[MW](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__MWMATRICES)). If there are farelinks, the fares accumulated by
crossing the fare links in the path are added to MODEFARE. There is not a way
to separate the farelinks, the various mode fares, etc. It is a difficult
process. Ideally, the program should have the same tools for fare as it does
for time, distance, etc. But, that process is also questionable: If a path goes
through modes 11-13-2-2-13-13-5-2-12, what fares should be assessed for the
path? It has used three mode-13 links and three mode-2 links; what fare should
be applied?

FARELINK values may be obtained
separately; but not by mode. Please see the next question:
How can I obtain farelink fares?

How can I obtain
farelink fares?

The only way that farelink fares can be obtained is through
[MW](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__MWMATRICES)[]=MODEFARE. This command obtains the sum of MODEFARES +
FARELINKS.

MW[]=FARE(ГўВҖВҰ.) sums the values from
FARE[MODEFARE](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__MODEFARE).

The program accumulates
FARELINK values into modefare, along with the
MODEFARE
values. To get
FARELINK values separately (but not by mode) you
need to add / subtract the fares from
MODEFAREs from the MODEFARE
value:

```
MW[]=MODEFARE - FARE(0)
```

Why is the total
number of trips reported by the TrnBuild module less than the input trip matrix
total?

TrnBuild reports only the trips
associated with zones where there is Transit access. If the program determines
that it doesnГўВҖВҷt need to read the trips for a zone, it doesnГўВҖВҷt bother reading
them, and then it canГўВҖВҷt report the values from those rows. Suppose that you
wish to assign only the trips from the downtown area (say zones 1-60). The
program is not going to spend the time to read the entire matrix since it
doesnГўВҖВҷt have to. This speeds up processing in large systems where only selected
processing is being done.

**Parent topic:** [Frequently Asked
Questions](GUID-078814F3-A213-4C26-8689-7528F1915945.html)

|
|  |
|
|  |
