# Updating CUBE Cluster

Cluster implementation has been updated in CUBE 7 to make it easier to
set-up Cluster processing in your model and to manage/select/monitor your
cluster resources before and during your model run.

Cluster Start/Stop

CUBE 7 has a new tool (Cluster pool manager) to manage the Cluster
resources available in your network environment. Cluster pools (groups of
machines) are then available to select when running your models. To learn more
about the cluster pool manager, please refer to
[Setting up Cluster
Pools](GUID-856D1BC9-430F-41B0-B609-652684E6C6A7.html)

With the introduction of Cluster pool manager, users do not have to use
Cluster start/stop commands in their models. These statements can be removed
from your model scripts.

Intrastep

Cluster intrastep distribute statement specification has been updated
and simplified in CUBE 7. Users do not have to manage the allocation of cluster
node numbers and process ids.

CUBE 6:
`DistributeIntraStep ProcessID='Test' ProcessList=2-16`

CUBE 7:
`DistributeIntrastep MaxProcesses = 15`

The "COMMPATH" and "WEIGHTS" parameters have been depreciated.

Multistep

Cluster multistep distribute statement specification has been updated
and simplified in CUBE 7. User’s do not have to specify and manage Cluster node
number and process ids. This has been replaced with the ALIAS parameter.

- ALIAS – defines a name for
  the multistep block. This name can be used in the BARRIER statement to check
  for process completion.

CUBE 6:
`DistributeMultiStep ProcessID=’Test’ ProcessNum = 1`

CUBE 7:
`DistributeMultiStep Alias = ‘AM Assignment’`

The COMMPATH keyword has been depreciated.

Checking Multistep Process Completion
(Wait4Files)

The Wait4Files statement used to check for process completion in a
multistep block has been replaced with the BARRIER statement which uses the
ALIAS name instead of the process name/process id information.

CUBE 6:
`Wait4Files Files=Test1.script.end, Test2.script.end
CheckReturnCode = T`

CUBE 7:
`BARRIER IDLIST=’AM_Assignment’, ‘PM_Assignment’ CheckReturnCode =
T`

For sample Scripts using the new CUBE Cluster see
[CUBE 7 Cluster
Sample Scripts](GUID-E0A8CA62-DFAE-4E17-AD6E-2ADB8B961E57.html)

The update to Cluster statements discussed above can be done through the
text editor in CUBE or through an external program such as Notepad++
(https://notepad-plus-plus.org/). Notepad++ provides advanced search
capabilities to quickly search for these statements across all the script files
in your model.

**Parent topic:**  [Moving to CUBE 7](GUID-7C6798F6-C733-4659-BDF2-22E58E4FB12C.html)

|
|  |
|
|  |
