# Build Network From Shape (BNFS)

BNFS allows to create a CUBE SQLite network by importing
links and nodes from:

- ESRI Shape Files (\*.SHP).
- CUBE 6 Binary Networks
  (\*.NET).
- SQLite databases (\*.SQLite)
  layers.

This paragraph provides some examples of using this
functionality.

Assuming to start with an ESRI Shape File for links and
nodes, we can define two variables storing these inputs, as below (where
data\_dir is a variable that stores the input directory path, relative path for
simplicity in the example, and the statement uses of a Python f-string).

```
data_dir = " input/shape_files/directory "
input_links = f"{data_dir}/Netowrk_Links.shp"
input_nodes = f"{data_dir}/Network_Nodes.shp"
```

First of all, we create a BNFSConfig object, and we store
this in a variable, for the new network. BNFSConfig will provide the
configuration for the BNFS process in terms of the new network name and various
settings.

```
new_network_name = "Highway"
config = cp.BNFSConfig(new_network_name)
```

We should then setup the linkDatasource and nodeDataSource.
Links are required whilst nodes are optional. In case a nodeDataSource is not
specified, then nodes are created from inspecting the links.

In the example below, both the link and node data sources
are supplied.

```
config.setLinkDataSource(input_links + "| SELECT * FROM Network_Links")  
config.setNodeDataSource(input_nodes + "| SELECT * FROM Network_Nodes")
```

Within these methods, CubePy GIS style path can be used that
allows to supply a query on links and nodes, for the conversion. Queries are
specified using the OGR SQL dialect. The query in the example above states to
build the network for all the links and nodes (
`SELECT *`). In the example below instead, this statement
will only build the network for those links satisfying the condition for column
func\_class to be equal 10.

```
config.setLinkDataSource(input_links + "| SELECT * FROM Network_Links where func_class=10")
```

The
setMaxZoneNumber method allows to specify
the maximum number of zones that are used in the input layer, so that BNFS will
identify centroid nodes and centroid connectors. An example is given below,
where the network has 25 zones in total.

```
config.setMaxZoneNumber(25)
```

The
setStartingNodeNumber method instead,
allows to specify what is the starting node number in case new node numbers are
created while building the network, i.e., the link table does not contain A and
B columns, and the node table does not contain N column. In the example below,
the starting node number will be 1000. This parameter not only defines the
initial node number when numbering the nodes though, it also defines two
internal attributes of the network, i.e. minNodeNumber and maxNodeNumber, that
are the minimum and maximum node numbers when excluding centroids. Therefore,
in case the network already contains A and B nodes, it is necessary to set this
parameter correctly (e.g., max zone number + 1). The default value is 10000.

```
config.setStartingNodeNumber(1000)
```

It is also possible to define the type of directionality
for the links in the input link shape file. The BNFSLinkDirectionType assumes
the following values:

|  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Code | BNFSLinkDirectionType | Description |
| 0 (default) | AllOneWay | All the links in input are represented as one-way links, i.e., two overlapping polylines, one per direction, for two-way links. No identifier is needed. |
| 1 | AllTwoWay | All the links are two-way, i.e., one link represents the two-way link, but there are not one way links in the network. |
| 2 | UsesIdentifier | Links in the network are both one-way or two-way, but for two-way links there is only one link and an identifier (link attribute) provides the information if the link is one-way or two-way. |

Note: currently only
cp.BNFSLinkDirectionType\_AllOneWay is supported.

To run an instance of BNFS with the defined configuration,
it is necessary to connect to an existing or new CUBE database and call the
BNFS method, like in the example below.

```
db = cp.CubeDatabase(output_db, True)  # "True" creates/re-creates the db
db.buildNetworkFromShape(config)
```

In case a CUBE 6 binary network (\*.NET) file is used instead of
shape files, we will have a specification like the below for specifying input
layers:

```
data_dir = "input/shape_files/directory"
input_net = f"{data_dir}/Netowrk.NET"
```

Supplying both link and node sources as below:

```
config.setLinkDataSource(input_net + f"| SELECT * FROM Link")
config.setNodeDataSource(input_net + f"| SELECT * FROM Node")
```

Note on setInputSpatialReferenceOverride

When using the BNFS tool, it is important to know the
correct spatial reference of the links (and nodes) that are being imported for
the correctness of the built network.

The setInputSpatialReferenceOverride method allows to define
the authority code defining the spatial reference of the input data, according
to spatialreference.org codes.

In case this is not explicitly specified by the user within
this method, BNFS class uses the OGR library to fetch the spatial reference of
the imported layers, in case the spatial reference is recognized (e.g., in the
.PRJ file associated to the Shape File in input), then:

- If the layer stores the
  information about the authority code associated to the spatial reference
  (Spatial Reference ID), then:
  - If the authority code
    matches an authority code included in the EPSG catalog, this is adopted as
    spatial reference for the output network and BNFS is executed successfully.
  - If the authority code
    does not match any code included in the EPSG catalog, then an error message is
    issued, and the user needs to set the spatial reference override code manually
    and run the BNFS again.
- If the layer that is
  imported does not store the information about the authority code, then the OGR
  library will try to find a match within the EPSG catalog accordingly to search
  criteria that are based on the specification of the spatial reference for the
  layer (e.g., information stored in the PRJ file associated to the Shape File).
  Then:
  - If matches are found in
    the EPSG catalog, the best match is used by BNFS for building the CUBE network.
    The user should be aware that the match might not exactly correspond to the
    actual ID, in case of poor correspondence, therefore it might be necessary in
    some cases to enter the spatial reference override ID and re-run the BNFS also
    in this case.
  - If a match cannot be
    found in the EPSG catalog, then an error message is again returned, and the
    code must be inserted manually by the user to successfully run BNFS.

It is important to highlight that the EPSG catalog contains
EPSG and ESRI references, but not other custom references. Therefore, in case
of a custom reference for the input dataset, it is necessary to specify this
within the setInputSpatialReferenceOverride method.

The SpatiaLite library table used by BNFS is updated to
support EPSG, ESRI and custom references.

It is necessary to provide the Spatial Reference ID within
the setInputSpatialReferenceOverride when using BNFS with CUBE 6 binary
networks (.NET), due to the fact that they do not store spatial information.

In the example below, the setInputSpatialReferenceOverride
is set to a custom spatial reference code 6826, corresponding to Clay county
coordinates (feet).

```
config.setInputSpatialReferenceOverride(6826)
```

**Parent topic:** [Application of the
Network API with CubePy](GUID-9F45BDF7-8305-4D84-94DB-596D532D93A1.html)

|
|  |
|
|  |
