# Control statements

All the standard Matrix statements are valid in Fratar, and
a few additional ones are available. Fratar is a subset of the Matrix program.
This section only describes the differences between the Matrix and Fratar
control statements. For descriptions of other control statements see
[Matrix Program](GUID-E2BE1642-097D-433F-A14A-31DE854840A8.html#GUID-E2BE1642-097D-433F-A14A-31DE854840A8).

Fratar statements not in Matrix:

- SETPA

Fratar keywords not in Matrix:

- PARAMETERS MAXITERS=
  MAXRMSE=
- REPORT ACOMP=
  PCOMP=

This section describes:

- [PARAMETERS](GUID-1FD57DE8-6295-4F7F-840E-30800D516DD7.html#GUID-1FD57DE8-6295-4F7F-840E-30800D516DD7__PARAMETERS_unique_1)
- [REPORT](GUID-1FD57DE8-6295-4F7F-840E-30800D516DD7.html#GUID-1FD57DE8-6295-4F7F-840E-30800D516DD7__REPORT_unique_1)
- [SETPA](GUID-1FD57DE8-6295-4F7F-840E-30800D516DD7.html#GUID-1FD57DE8-6295-4F7F-840E-30800D516DD7__SETPA)

Parameters

Sets general parameters.

Keywords include:

- [MATOEVERY](GUID-1FD57DE8-6295-4F7F-840E-30800D516DD7.html#GUID-1FD57DE8-6295-4F7F-840E-30800D516DD7__MATOEVERY)
- [MAXITERS](GUID-1FD57DE8-6295-4F7F-840E-30800D516DD7.html#GUID-1FD57DE8-6295-4F7F-840E-30800D516DD7__MAXITERS)
- [MAXPURPS](GUID-1FD57DE8-6295-4F7F-840E-30800D516DD7.html#GUID-1FD57DE8-6295-4F7F-840E-30800D516DD7__MAXPURPS)
- [MAXRMSE](GUID-1FD57DE8-6295-4F7F-840E-30800D516DD7.html#GUID-1FD57DE8-6295-4F7F-840E-30800D516DD7__MAXRMSE)
- [ZONES](GUID-1FD57DE8-6295-4F7F-840E-30800D516DD7.html#GUID-1FD57DE8-6295-4F7F-840E-30800D516DD7__ZONES)

In addition to the standard Matrix parameters (see
[PARAMETERS](GUID-62A32849-2DC3-47F3-AD9D-839A756C1557.html#GUID-62A32849-2DC3-47F3-AD9D-839A756C1557)), you may specify the parameters described here.

PARAMETERS keywords

- MATOEVERY - |K?|
  - Switch that can force the program to write output matrices for every
  iteration, instead of waiting until the last iteration.

  For large systems, not writing output matrices for each
  iteration saves considerable computer time, but forces another processing
  iteration to write the matrices after reaching convergence.

  Writing output matrices for each iteration increases run
  times for each iteration, but prevents the program from having to run another
  iteration to write the output matrices after reaching convergence.

  If you anticipate that there will be many iterations
  before reaching convergence, set this switch to false. If you anticipate that
  the process will involve only a few iterations, set this switch true.
- MAXITERS - |KI| -
  Maximum number of iterations. If the
  MAXRMSE criterion is met, the number of
  iterations actually performed could be less than this value.

  The default is 9, and the max is 99.
- MAXPURPS - |KI| -
  Number of purposes to process in this application.
  FRATAR allows up to 20 trip purposes.
  MAXPURPS is not required, because the program
  will determine the value from the detection of the values on the
  SETPA
  statements. But, if this value is provided, and it
  conflicts with the
  SETPA statements, a fatal message will be
  issued.
- MAXRMSE - |KR| -
  Cutoff criteria. If the RMSE for a purpose does not exceed this value, a
  solution is assumed for the purpose.

  The default is 10, and the minimum is 0.
- ZONES - |kI| -
  Highest zone number to process.

  If the number of zones cannot be ascertained from the
  project file or from any binary input matrices,
  ZONES must be provided, or the value will
  default to 100. If present, this value controls the application. Normally,
  there will be an input matrix file, so this keyword should not be required.

REPORT

Keywords include:

- [ACOMP](GUID-1FD57DE8-6295-4F7F-840E-30800D516DD7.html#GUID-1FD57DE8-6295-4F7F-840E-30800D516DD7__ACOMP)
- [PCOMP](GUID-1FD57DE8-6295-4F7F-840E-30800D516DD7.html#GUID-1FD57DE8-6295-4F7F-840E-30800D516DD7__PCOMP)

In addition to the
 [REPORT](GUID-62A32849-2DC3-47F3-AD9D-839A756C1557.html#GUID-62A32849-2DC3-47F3-AD9D-839A756C1557__REPORT_unique_4) keywords available for Matrix, the following are
also available for Fratar:

REPORT keywords

- ACOMP - |KIP| -
  Requests report comparing computed to target attractions for specified
  purposes. The report is in a format that is similar to the MARGINS report. The
  values are reported as nearest integers (without decimal places). Only the
  purposes specified by the keyword are reported, but they are reported for all
  odd iterations.
- PCOMP - |KIP| - Same
  as
  ACOMP, but refers to productions, and refers
  to only even iterations.

Example

```
ACOMP=1-3,5 ;request reports for the specified purposes
```

SETPA

Establishes base productions and attractions.

Keywords include:

- [A](GUID-1FD57DE8-6295-4F7F-840E-30800D516DD7.html#GUID-1FD57DE8-6295-4F7F-840E-30800D516DD7__A)
- [AGF](GUID-1FD57DE8-6295-4F7F-840E-30800D516DD7.html#GUID-1FD57DE8-6295-4F7F-840E-30800D516DD7__AGF)
- [CONTROL](GUID-1FD57DE8-6295-4F7F-840E-30800D516DD7.html#GUID-1FD57DE8-6295-4F7F-840E-30800D516DD7__CONTROL)
- [EXCLUDE](GUID-1FD57DE8-6295-4F7F-840E-30800D516DD7.html#GUID-1FD57DE8-6295-4F7F-840E-30800D516DD7__EXCLUDE)
- [INCLUDE](GUID-1FD57DE8-6295-4F7F-840E-30800D516DD7.html#GUID-1FD57DE8-6295-4F7F-840E-30800D516DD7__INCLUDE)
- [MW](GUID-1FD57DE8-6295-4F7F-840E-30800D516DD7.html#GUID-1FD57DE8-6295-4F7F-840E-30800D516DD7__MW_unique_1)
- [P](GUID-1FD57DE8-6295-4F7F-840E-30800D516DD7.html#GUID-1FD57DE8-6295-4F7F-840E-30800D516DD7__P)
- [PGF](GUID-1FD57DE8-6295-4F7F-840E-30800D516DD7.html#GUID-1FD57DE8-6295-4F7F-840E-30800D516DD7__PGF)

The
SETPA statement is
required; if it is not included, the
program will fatally terminate.

These statements define how the production and attraction
factors are to be obtained, and how many purposes are to be processed. There
should be a P[]= and A[]= and MW[]= expression for every purpose beginning with
1 and continuing, monotonically, until all purposes are defined. (FRATAR allows
up to 20 trip purposes.) The highest index encountered establishes the number
of purposes.

If there are any holes in the purpose scheme, the program
will issue a warning statement.

The Ps and As are computed from the expressions that are
supplied. In most cases, the expression will simply point to a ZDATI file
variable. Complex expressions are allowed, but the use of any variables in the
expression could cause unpredictable results. In a purpose where the Ps and As
are the same for each zone, it is acceptable to set the Ps, and then set the As
equal to the Ps. The SETPA expressions are computed in the order in which they
appear in the control stream, and they are computed only one time – prior to
the first iteration. For each array, the expression is solved in a loop of
J=1-Zones, and the results are stored in the A,P,MW [n][J] cells. The keywords
may not have a zone index in the SETPA statement.

If the same purpose is referenced more than one time, the
subsequent values will replace the prior values. Duplication of purposes might
be helpful if values for different zones for a purpose are to be obtained from
different sources, or if different
INCLUDE/EXCLUDE filters are to be used (different
SETPA statements must be used for different filters).

SETPA keywords

- A - |NV| - Expression
  solved to set the target attraction totals for the indexed purpose.
- AGF - |NV| - Expression
  solved to set the target attraction growth factors for the indexed purpose. The
  final totals are obtained by multiplying the growth factors by the initial
  input matrix totals.
- CONTROL - |SV\*| -
  String indicating how to adjust final target totals to enable convergence. The
  possible values are:

  P - Production totals control; As will be adjusted

  A - Attraction totals control; Ps will be adjusted

  PA - Both Ps and As will be adjusted to the average of
  the P and A totals.

  PL - Same as P, but only As in adjustable zones will be
  adjusted

  AL - Same as A, but only Ps in adjustable zones will be
  adjusted

  PAL - SameasPA,but only adjustable zones will be
  adjusted
- EXCLUDE - |IP| -
  Processed the same as
  EXCLUDE on
  COMP
  statements (see
  [COMP](GUID-0776F0F6-CB16-4D4F-8AC6-CFABFE50B531.html#GUID-0776F0F6-CB16-4D4F-8AC6-CFABFE50B531__COMP)). If it is used, the loop will not be processed for
  any zones in the list. EXCLUDE filtering follows any
  INCLUDE filtering.
- INCLUDE - |IP| -
  Processed the same as
  INCLUDE on
  COMP statements ( see
  [COMP](GUID-0776F0F6-CB16-4D4F-8AC6-CFABFE50B531.html#GUID-0776F0F6-CB16-4D4F-8AC6-CFABFE50B531__COMP)). If it is used, the loop will not be processed for any
  zones not in the list.
  INCLUDE filtering precedes any EXCLUDE zones.
- MW - |NV| -
  Expression solved for each zone during the first iteration. The result is the
  matrix row for that zone. Usually, this expression will be a single variable
  name such as MI.n.n, but that is not required.
- P - |NV| - Expression
  solved to set the target production totals for the indexed purpose.
- PGF - |NV| - Expression
  solved to set the target production growth factors for the indexed purpose.

Example

Using single
CONTROL keyword:

```
SETPA PGF[1]=zi.1.xifac, AGF[1]=PGF[1], MW[1]=mi.1.1 CONTROL=PAL
```

Using multiple
CONTROL keywords:

```
SETPA P[1]=(ZI.1.P1) A[1]=(ZI.1.A1) MW[1]=1 CONTROL[1]=A
SETPA P[2]=(ZI.1.P1) A[2]=(ZI.1.A1) MW[2]=1 CONTROL[2]=P
SETPA P[3]=(ZI.1.P1) A[3]=(ZI.1.A1) MW[3]=1 CONTROL[3]=PA
```

**Parent topic:** [Fratar](GUID-E86B3B7E-3499-4ED4-B428-F5A044BC30AE.html)

|
|  |
|
|  |
