# Minimum System Requirements

CUBE Voyager requires a Windows XP, Windows Vista, Windows
7 or Windows 8 environment in which to function. The system utilizes RAM as
needed; most applications will not require any special RAM considerations. The
exact amount of RAM required can not be determined until an application
actually runs and the combination of user options is diagnosed. It is fairly
safe to state that if a computer can run Windows, it has enough RAM to run CUBE
Voyager.

About 10GB of disk space is required to install CUBE Base
and CUBE Voyager. 100GB or more may be required for model outputs. A typical
application will require zonal data files, networks, and matrices. Zonal data
files are not very large, and network sizes will depend upon the number of
alternatives and variables that the user wishes to employ. The largest networks
will be only a few MB. The largest storage requirements will be associated with
matrices. A matrix will contain zones × zones cells of information. Each cell
value can be from 0 to 9 bytes in size, but CUBE Voyager uses a proprietary
data compression technique that helps to reduce the sizes. The user can control
the matrix sizing.

CUBE Voyager is designed to run in a multitasking
environment. In such an environment, there is a possibility that several
simultaneous applications could try to access the same data files
simultaneously. This could possibly cause problems if one application is trying
to update a file while other applications are accessing it.

**Parent topic:** [Introduction](GUID-A73FA9DB-8D98-4719-BAD9-2A61507CD6A1.html)

|
|  |
|
|  |
