# MPICORES

Type = Integer(+)

This is an advanced MPI parameter.
MPICORES may be specified to invoke the mpiexec
command by defining the number of processes to launch according to the -np
command line argument. This value should not exceed the number of user classes,
and will be set to the maximum number of user classes if it does.
MPICORES x
[NCORES](GUID-E23E89B8-1CBA-41D1-A643-788A7C2CC72B.html) is
the total number of cores that can be used by the program. Note that
MPICORES is at a higher level than
[NCORES](GUID-E23E89B8-1CBA-41D1-A643-788A7C2CC72B.html),
each MPI core will use
[NCORES](GUID-E23E89B8-1CBA-41D1-A643-788A7C2CC72B.html) for
a single user class. E.g. if a computer has 12 cores and
MPICORES=5, then the most
[NCORES](GUID-E23E89B8-1CBA-41D1-A643-788A7C2CC72B.html) can
be is 2 (will be reduced by the CPU regardless of input value) and each MPI
core will utilize 2 total cores. In this case, the program will only use 10
cores of the 12 available to the computer. If on the other hand
MPICORES
were set to 4, then
[NCORES](GUID-E23E89B8-1CBA-41D1-A643-788A7C2CC72B.html)
could be as high as 3, and all 12 cores would be utilized. This is important to
keep in mind when choosing how to assign the total number of CPU cores on a
computer for a given problem. This topic is discussed more in the best
practices section of this guide. This parameter cannot be used with the
[MPIHOSTS](GUID-502BA901-479F-4237-9897-6FDEEBF50E83.html)
parameter, but if using the
[MPIHOST](GUID-B3FE59AC-ECF3-4C86-A7CD-755FB2CE424D.html) or
[MPIMACHF](GUID-50B8F61A-9ED6-403E-9E1D-2C4278195F9A.html)
parameters it must be specified or only a single process will be started by
mpiexec.

**Parent topic:**  [Parameters](GUID-BE49B418-D604-498C-9957-1B26EC5E26EF.html)

|
|  |
|
|  |
