# All-way-stop-controlled intersections

All-way-stop-controlled intersections are unsignalized
intersections with "stop" signs at every approach.

CUBE 6.4 version supports both HCM2000 and HCM 2010 modeling
of All-way stop controlled intersections. This can be set up using the
HCMVersion keyword. The model is described for
different cases based on intersection geometry and the arrival patterns at the
stop line. The model’s only variable is the number of lanes for each arm. The
model can be used to analyze the capacity, delay, queue and LOS of
all-way-stop-controlled (AWSC) intersections. The low flow delay is the
adjusted saturation headway or the inverse of the capacity for AWSC
intersections.

The capacities reported by models of undersaturated
all-way-stop- controlled intersections can appear very large. However, the
model is very nonlinear and, as the flows are increased, the capacities will
decrease.

All-way-stop-controlled intersection
keywords

- NUMBEROFLANES - |I| - Number of
  lanes at an approach to an all-way- stop-controlled intersection. Valid values
  are 1, 2, or 3.
- HEAVYVEHICLES - |I| - Number of
  heavy vehicles per approach. Default value is set to 0.

Note: Keywords are case insensitive. For example, capitalizing
as
NumberOfLanes might improve readability.

Example

The following example describes an all-way-stop-controlled
intersection between a one-lane road and a two-lane road.

```
Junction Node = 9 Type = AllWayStop Approach1 = 8,
  Approach = 6 NumberOfLanes = 1,
  Approach = 7 NumberOfLanes = 2,
  Approach = 8 NumberOfLanes = 1,
  Approach = 5 NumberOfLanes = 2
```

References

- Transportation Research Board.
  Highway Capacity Manual 2000.
- Transportation Research Board.
  Highway Capacity Manual
  2010.

**Parent topic:** [Intersection Modeling](GUID-B225FDCD-0F36-45AB-A3DB-32DC75608255.html)

|
|  |
|
|  |
