# Using TRNBUILD in CUBE Voyager

Developed for TP+, TRNBUILD has some unique differences
from other CUBE Voyager programs. Important differences include:

- TRNBUILD supports a maximum of 64 transit lines through
  the same common stop node.
- TRNBUILD supports a maximum of 255 modes.
- TRNBUILD documentation refers to non-transit links as
  either support links or non-transit. Both terms have the same meaning.
- When coding TRNBUILD scripts, enter any distances in
  control statements in hundredths of distance units without any decimal point.
  Enter time and speed as true values, including the decimal point included. For
  example, code 1.5 miles as 150, and code 1.4 minutes as 1.4.

Note: This applies to script statements only.
NETI
values are real: Enter distances in true units (miles or
kilometers, with decimal points included) on the networks.

- Times and distances are only accurate to the second
  decimal place. To increase efficiency, TRNBUILD stores times and distances as
  16-bit integers with an implied scale of 100 and a maximum value of 65,530. For
  example, TRNBUILD stores a network distance 1.235 as 124, and stores a time of
  1.001 as 100.
- TRNBUILD displays distances reported in the print file
  or any output files in hundredths of units. TRNBUILD reports times in real
  units in the print file, except for the LINESTRING report and the TRACE
  summary. TRNBUILD outputs times in hundredths of units in
  LINKO and
  MATO.
- Use the MATRICES statement to define the total number
  of O/P matrices in the
  MATO file. You can only use a limited number
  of variables or values in matrix calculations. Expressions cannot reference the
  values from other matrices.
- The process is static; you cannot alter processes on a
  zone-by-zone basis.

**Parent topic:** [TRNBUILD
program](GUID-C2CBB4E1-D0A0-480D-AD04-E66622416C75.html)

|
|  |
|
|  |
