# Using Pilot Program

The Pilot program is the basic driver for CUBE Voyager
application programs, but it is also a calculator by itself. Most users will
use Pilot only to invoke the individual programs in the order desired. Pilot
can check the return codes of the individual programs, invoke system commands,
and even perform complex mathematical computations, either for its own use or
to pass on to the application programs. Through the use of loops and
conditional branching, application programs can be run in any order desired.

This section discusses:

- [Ouput files](GUID-CD5F54F6-DC8B-47A2-AB6E-5599A385AA40.html#GUID-CD5F54F6-DC8B-47A2-AB6E-5599A385AA40__OUTPUTFILES)
- [Process](GUID-CD5F54F6-DC8B-47A2-AB6E-5599A385AA40.html#GUID-CD5F54F6-DC8B-47A2-AB6E-5599A385AA40__PROCESS)
- [Statement tokens (%…% and @…@)](GUID-CD5F54F6-DC8B-47A2-AB6E-5599A385AA40.html#GUID-CD5F54F6-DC8B-47A2-AB6E-5599A385AA40__STATEMENTTOKENS)

Output File

A project file,
pppp.PRJ, is maintained (generated, if
necessary) in the working sub-directory. It contains certain values that help
the program to establish unique project identifications between applications
that are run at separate times, and those that might be run simultaneously in a
separate thread in a multitasking environment. Each application run generates a
print and a variable file. The file names are
ppppnnnn with extensions of PRN and VAR,
respectively. The
pppp
portion of the name is the project prefix obtained from the P
argument on the command line. The nnnn is a sequential number assigned in
conjunction with data obtained from the project file. The variable file will
contain a list of all the variables and their values that are in the Vars array
when the program terminates. If there are no specific Vars to be written; this
file will be deleted. Otherwise, the VAR file is renamed to pppp.VAR.
Consequently, there will be only one VAR file for each prefix.

Note:

CUBE Voyager does not seem to sign on correctly, or
indicates strange filenames or default parameters, most likely the pppp.PRJ
file has been corrupted. In such cases, the remedy is to delete the pppp.PRJ
file and restart the process. CUBE also uses .PRJ files, and it is possible for
the user to confuse the two and store Viper configuration information into a
CUBE Voyager .PRJ, and vice versa.

Process

Recent changes in recommended planning analysis dictate
that the simple serial processing may become inadequate. There will need to be
"recursive" applications that are driven by intermediate results. Ideally, this
process could be written into a large program, and handled as such. But there
are disadvantages to that approach (not discussed in this document). A typical
simplified highway application would require that the following steps be run
(after the network and trip end data have been compiled and checked):

1. Build paths, and add distribution parameters (terminal
   and intrazonal times).
2. Distribute trip ends according to the paths and user
   functions.
3. Adjust person trip matrices to account for non-model
   characteristics, peak period factors, and auto occupancy.
4. Assign trips to the network.

After the application of a series of programs to accomplish
this has been completed, you would have to verify the results, and decide if
the process needs to be rerun with adjustments, or if the results are
satisfactory. The decision process usually will include some type of numerical
analysis. If the results of the analysis are not satisfactory, the process may
be repeated with some adjustments in the input data, or parameters. Typically,
the repeat process is just that: the input data and/or parameters are modified,
and the process is resubmitted.

CUBE Voyager simplifies this process by allowing the user
to program the process to adjust the data and/or parameters and automatically
repeat the entire process, or just selected portions of it. In the simple case,
if the final speeds are not acceptable, the process could be looped until
speeds come into a reasonable balance, or until it is decided that a proper
balance can not be achieved. That is only a simple portion of the capabilities
of CUBE Voyager. As the user learns more of its capabilities, he/she will find
that he/she can control the process in many innovative ways.

The input is comprised of computational, flow control,
program, and system statements. The program begins by reading and editing the
CUBE Voyager specific statements. The non-CUBE Voyager statements (system
statements, and the statements that follow a RUN statement until its
terminating statement) are not edited by CUBE Voyager.

When all CUBE Voyager statements have been edited for basic
syntax, and have been stored in the control stack, the program builds a list of
variables and their values from all the COMP and LOOP statements and the
variables found in the optional VARI file. The list is stored in the Vars
array. It then begins processing the control stack at the beginning. Each stack
statement is executed, and flow branches to the next appropriate stack
statement. When the end of the stack or an EXIT statement is reached, the
program terminates.

Stack statements fall into several categories:

- Computational statements — Cause
  variable values to be updated. Typical control statements are:

  COMP (often invoked by simply: var = )
- Flow control statements
  - Help to determine which statement is to be performed
  next. Typical flow control statements are:

  - GOTO
  - :LABEL
  - ONRUNERRORGOTO
  - CLEARERROR
  - LOOP BREAK CONTINUE ENDLOOP
  - IF ELSEIF ELSE ENDIF
  - EXIT

    The program provides the user with the capability to
    react to fatal returns from Bentleys' programs. When a "RUN PGM=program" statement is executed, the program sets a
    return code that indicates what type of messages it issued. The return code is
    either 0 (No messages), 1 (Warning messages), 2 (Fatal messages), or 3 (program
    aborted); this value is stored in a variable named RETURNCODE. If RETURNCODE is
    greater than 1, the run is automatically terminated. However, if the user has
    set the string variable named ONRUNERRORGOTO to point to a legitimate label
    statement in the script, the run will continue at the labeled statement if the
    return code is 2.

    At the labeled statement, the user can further
    control what is to happen with the run. Typically, the user will issue a
    message, and possibly continue the run. To continue, the user will have to
    clear the internal RETURNCODE variable, or subsequent tests of the run status
    may cause termination. The CLEARERROR statement is used to reset the internal
    return code; it can not be cleared by setting RETURNCODE=. The CLEARERROR
    statement also provides a keyword to allow the user to resume executing script
    at the point following the RUN statement that caused control to be switched to
    the label specified by ONRUNERRORGOTO.
- Program statements — Execute a
  CUBE Voyager program. A program statement always begins with:

  RUN PGM=
- System statements
  — Program initiates an operating-system command. A system
  statement is one in which the first field begins with a \*, and is at least two
  characters long. Typically, system statements are used only in pure DOS
  applications; they will function within Windows applications, but their use is
  not recommended.

Example

```
*COPY*.DATd:
```

Warning: Do NOT use a system statement to initiate another
CUBE Voyager application.

With the capabilities of these statements, the user can
cause the stack to be processed in almost any order desired. With the flow
control capabilities, stack segments can be repeated until desired results are
achieved. A typical example would be the repeated application of a series of
programs beginning with trip distribution and progressing through assignment.
If the adjusted speeds from the assignment program differ too much from the
speeds that were used in the distribution process, the series should be
repeated. Another example could be the repeated application of a program with a
slightly different set of parameters, or different input files. It is up to the
user to control the flow.

Statement tokens (%…% and
@…@)

Any statement may contain tokens for substitution. There are
two types of tokens: %…% and @…@.

If a CUBE Voyager control statement contains a %…% token,
the token is replaced by the value of the operating system (OS) environment
variable between the % signs. If there is no matching variable name in the
environment, the token is unchanged (the variable name is case insensitive). It
should be noted that the environment is a copy of the environment prior to the
execution of CUBE Voyager. (Note: Any \*SET statements will NOT alter the
environment; it is suggested that \*SET statements not be used.) There is not
much use for %…%, but there might be times where it can be quite helpful.

The @…@ tokens are processed only when the statement is
being processed by a program called via the RUN PGM= statement. When a program
is called, it is provided access to the .VAR file with the current values from
the CUBE Voyager Vars array. The program can update the file when it
terminates, but the Vars array is not updated until CUBE Voyager is back in
control. If the program reads a control statements that contains a @…@ token,
the token is replaced by the value of the file variable named between the @
signs. (Note: The token is replaced literally at the time the program reads the
statement; a subsequent change to that variable will not alter the value as
read.) If the named variable does not exist in the Vars file, the token is
unchanged.

Example

```
MAX_LOOP = 20
LOOP loop_cnt=1,20
RUN PGM=program
ID = This is the @loop_cnt@ out of @MAX_LOOP@
ENDRUN
ENDLOOP
```

In this example, MAXLOOP had to be set because LOOP
currently accepts only constants for it limits. To keep it entirely generic,
MAXLOOP could be set into the environment (SET MAXLOOP=20) prior to launching
CUBE Voyager; then the sample could be coded as:

```
LOOP loop_cnt=1,%MAXLOOP%
RUN PGM=program
ID = This is the @loop_cnt@ out of %MAXLOOP%
ENDRUN
ENDLOOP
```

The READ statement (see
[General Syntax](GUID-DE2905C2-9EEC-4ED6-99F8-BA2EDA9B6ADF.html)) also has capabilities for setting
replacement strings in control statements. READ statements are recognized in
all CUBE Voyager applications.

**Parent topic:** [Pilot Program](GUID-156A3313-983F-49C1-AB26-1D63602E78C9.html)

|
|  |
|
|  |
