# Connecting to a matrix with the CubeMatrix Class

Once a matrix file has been opened, several methods are
available to investigate the content of the matrix file. The following two
methods can be used to generate a CubeMatrix
object from the CubeMatrixFile:

- addMatrix(name, (dataType),
  (compressionLevel)), adding a new matrix inside the matrix file, with name,
  data type and compression level specified as arguments.
- matrix(name or index),
  connecting to an existing matrix with the specified name or index.

The matrix data types are given by the below
CubeMatrixDataType object. We would recommend not using numbers for the
enumerated types as these numbers may change, e.g., preferable to use
cp.CubeMatrixDataType\_Double.

| Code | CubeMatrixDataType |
| --- | --- |
| 0 | Int8 |
| 1 | Int16 |
| 2 | Int32 |
| 3 | Int64 |
| 4 | Float |
| 5 (default) | Double |
| 6 | String |
| 7 | Unknown |

The compression level is given by the below
CubeMatrixCompressionLevel object. We would recommend not using numbers for the
enumerated types as these numbers may change, e.g., preferable to use
cp.CubeMatrixCompressionLevel\_Level\_1.

| Code | CubeMatrixCompressionLevel |
| --- | --- |
| 0 (default) | NoCompression |
| 1 | Level\_1 |
| 2 | Level\_2 |
| 3 | Level\_3 |
| 4 | Level\_4 |
| 5 | Level\_5 |
| 6 | Level\_6 |
| 7 | Level\_7 |
| 8 | Level\_8 |
| 9 | Level\_9 |

The first example below shows how to add a new matrix to the
matrix file, with name "new\_random\_matrix", data type "Double" and compression
level 1.

```
new_matrix = mt.addMatrix("new_random_matrix", cp.CubeMatrixDataType_Double, cp.CubeMatrixCompressionLevel_Level_1)
```

The second example below show how to open an existing matrix
instead, which name is "existing\_matrix".

```
mat_tab = mt.matrix("existing_matrix")
```

**Parent topic:** [Application of the
Matrix API with CubePy](GUID-AFCFCBB1-51C9-4D88-8C62-C2DB08CD7F15.html)

|
|  |
|
|  |
