# Creating a new CUBE Network within a CUBE Database with the CubeDatabase class

The createNetwork() method can be used to create a new
highway network within the CUBE database, created in
[Creating a new CUBE Database with the CubeDatabase class](GUID-7342A7FA-E32D-4113-A483-EB890A314D82.html).

The createNetwork() method requires the following
arguments:

- name = string, name of the
  new network dataset (no-default).
- nodeAttributes = vector of
  node attributes, this could be a Python list or cp.FieldVector() (no-default).

Each element of the list needs to be defined with a
cp.Field() method, requiring name and type of the attribute as arguments. Types
can be specified with their numeric code (e.g., 0 for Integer type), or with
the enumerator (e.g, cp.FieldType\_Integer), nevertheless, we would recommend
not using numbers for the enumerated types as these numbers may change in the
future. Therefore, as an example, the nodeAttributes vector will have a
structure of the type:

```
nodeAttributes = [cp.Field("attr_name1", cp.FieldType_Integer),	
																										cp.Field("attr_name2", cp.FieldType_String)]
```

- linkAttributes = vector of
  link attributes, this could be a Python list or cp.FieldVector() (no-default).
  The same approach described above for node attributes should be used.
- maxZoneNumber = integer
  defining the maximum zone number (no-default).
- startingNodeNumber =
  integer defining the starting node number (no-default).
- spatialReferenceId =
  integer defining the spatial reference identifer to be set (no-default).
- distanceAttributeName =
  string defining the name of the attribute to be used for distance, if any
  (default is none).
- distanceUnitExponent =
  power of 10 to associate with the distance value (default is 0).
- rightHandDrive = Boolean
  defining whether the network uses right hand drive (default is True).

An example of the definition of the new network is provided
below:

```
nodeAttributes = [cp.Field("attr_name1", cp.FieldType_Integer)]  
# example with int for the node attributes
linkAttributes = [cp.Field("attr_name1", cp.FieldType_Integer), cp.Field("attr_name2", cp.FieldType_String)]  
# example with int and str for the link attributes
max_zone_nr = 1000
starting_node_nr = 1001
srid = 4326  # EPSG:4326 - WGS 84 
db.createNetwork("new_network", nodeAttributes, linkAttributes, max_zone_nr, starting_node_nr, srid)
```

**Parent topic:** [Application of the
Network API with CubePy](GUID-9F45BDF7-8305-4D84-94DB-596D532D93A1.html)

|
|  |
|
|  |
