# Working with Non-Transit Legs

The following methods allow to work with Non-Transit Legs
with the CubeAPI:

- NonTransitLeg() class: defining a
  NonTransitLeg object, i.e., a non-transit leg object with associated
  attributes.
- NonTransitMode() class: defining a
  NonTransitMode object, i.e., a non-transit mode object with associated
  attributes.
- NonTransitLegVector()
  class: defining a vector of NonTranstLeg objects.
- Within the
  CubeDatabase class:
  - createNonTransitNetwork(): create a non-transit layer
    associated to a highway network within the CUBE database.
  - addNonTransitLeg(): adding a
    NonTransitLeg object to the non-transit layer associated to the network.
  - addNonTransitLegs(): adding a vector
    of NonTransitLeg objects to the non-transit layer associated to the network.
  - addNonTransitLegsFromLegFile(): this method uses a CUBE Voyager .ntl file to
    generate the non-transit legs in the network. The non-transit modes need to be
    added first to the non-transit layer, before importing the nt-legs from the
    file, for the generated network to work.
  - addNonTransitMode(): adding a
    NonTransitMode object to the non-transit layers associated to the network.
    Modes specifications need to be added consistently with the modes defined in
    the non-transit leg itself.
  - nonTransitLeg(): retrieving the
    non-transit leg information via its legName.
  - nonTransitLegNames(): returning a
    tuple with the names of the non-transit legs inside the non-transit layer.
  - nonTransitMode(): retrieving the
    non-transit mode information via its mode number.
  - nonTransitModeNumbers(): returning a
    tuple with the non-transit mode numbers that are defined in the non-transit
    layer.
  - nonTransitNetworkNames(): returning
    a tuple with the names of the non-transit layers associated to the highway
    network.
  - removeNonTransitLeg(): remove the
    non-transit leg based on the leg name.
  - removeNonTransitLegs(): remove the
    non-transit legs based on a list of leg names.
  - removeNonTransitMode(): remove the
    non-transit mode based on its number.
  - removeNonTransitNetwork(): remove
    the non-transit layer from the CUBE database.
  - setNonTransitLegSequence(): set the
    sequence of nodes crossed by the non-transit leg.

**Parent topic:** [Application of the
Network API with CubePy](GUID-9F45BDF7-8305-4D84-94DB-596D532D93A1.html)

|
|  |
|
|  |
