# Matrix Editor

Through Matrix Editor a matrix file can be viewed in a grid
format with each matrix value in a cell. This view of a matrix presents the
data in the tabular format and is designed to allow a convenient browsing
mechanism. If a matrix file has multiple tables then the tables will be tabbed.

Opening a Matrix
File

From the
File menu, choose
Open. Browse for the matrix file and click
Open.

Tip: A matrix
file filter (Matrix (\*.cube-matrix, \*.mat) is available in the Open window

By default CUBE will have the Intrazonal indicator on which
corresponds to a dotted border around cells. It is possible to turn it off by
going to
Tools>Properties>Table
and unchecking the Intrazonal Indicator option.

Editing a Matrix
File

CUBE allows to edit records of a
.cube-matrix file by typing a new value
in the current cell or field. For information on how to edit and save your
changes to a matrix, check
[Data
Editing](GUID-6A009C17-F30C-4772-9864-D611CC166602.html).

Matrix Tools

Matrix Editor contains similar tools and
functionalities than those of Table Editor like
[data
comparison](GUID-886029CD-57BB-4E1E-8101-74FC7C5C6A4D.html),
[color
gradient for cell values](GUID-4613DB2F-F674-4134-9948-335EF20A8DDD.html),
[data
statistics](GUID-6C535873-C520-4D53-A7F5-32FA17060845.html) among other navigation tools available in the tutorial
section
[Everything to do with tables and matrices.](GUID-E2E1AE8B-CDD1-4908-8DF2-23FE5E4C6C1E.html)

To help the workflow when handling matrices CUBE has
introduced the option to label matrix rows/columns to have a more identifiable
and descriptive name. This label can be easily turned on/off when working with
the matrix, see the
[Labeling matrix zones](GUID-F3B5C413-21C7-4124-90F2-88A23361F2DC.html)tutorial for information on how to do
this

**Parent topic:** [Table Editor](GUID-C900B39A-630B-48D9-93CB-066641EB1A9E.html)

|
|  |
|
|  |
