# Overview

The Public Transport program is the CUBE Voyager program
that lets you prepare public transport data and model public transport systems.
This section provides an overview of the Public Transport program, listing the
program’s primary capabilities, required inputs and generated outputs, and
discussing how you can use the program to prepare data and model public
transport systems. This section also discusses terminology used within this
document.

Topics include:

- [Summary of facts](GUID-332F64D8-374C-4A69-AA7B-84F52496347F.html#GUID-332F64D8-374C-4A69-AA7B-84F52496347F__SUMMARYOFFACTS)
- [Preparing data](GUID-332F64D8-374C-4A69-AA7B-84F52496347F.html#GUID-332F64D8-374C-4A69-AA7B-84F52496347F__PREPARINGDATA)
- [Modeling](GUID-332F64D8-374C-4A69-AA7B-84F52496347F.html#GUID-332F64D8-374C-4A69-AA7B-84F52496347F__MODELING)
- [Heuristic Process](GUID-332F64D8-374C-4A69-AA7B-84F52496347F.html#GUID-332F64D8-374C-4A69-AA7B-84F52496347F__HEURISTICPROCESS)
- [Terminology](GUID-332F64D8-374C-4A69-AA7B-84F52496347F.html#GUID-332F64D8-374C-4A69-AA7B-84F52496347F__TERMINOLOGY)

Summary of facts

The Public Transport program offers:

- User control over all aspects of the Public Transport
  model
- True multirouting between zone pairs, or alternatively
  single best-path routes may be used
- Demand stratification by user class with variations in
  the behavior of classes represented by different cost functions
- Comprehensive fares modeling
- Preparation of a public transport network for Public
  Transport’s modeling functionality
- Generation of the nontransit element of the public
  transport network (that is, access, egress, transfer and park and ride legs)
- Skimming, network-wide and mode specific, composite and
  average travel costs, and components of costs
- Two methods (service-frequency and
  service-frequency-and- cost) for loading demand on to transit choices at stops
- Analyses of loaded trips—transfers between modes,
  operators, lines, a variety of stop-to-stop movements, select-link/line outputs
- Reporting of input data, model infrastructure, multiple
  routes with probability of use, line and link loads, secondary analyses

The Public Transport program requires as input:

- A highway or public transport network
- Public transport system data
- Line data
- Fare data
- Nontransit legs (developed externally or by Public
  Transport)
- Generalized cost information
- Demand

The Public Transport program produces:

- Nontransit legs
- Enumerated routes
- Skim and select-link matrices
- Loaded lines and nontransit legs
- Transfer matrices—results of loading analyses
- A variety of reports of input data and model results
- A public transport network that can be displayed by
  CUBE and used as an input network for further modeling

Preparing data

You can use the Public Transport program to prepare data
that supports public transport modeling. You can prepare:

- A network, produced by Network or Public Transport,
  containing characteristics of zones, nodes and links (that is, node
  coordinates, walk and transit link times, distance, and so forth), over which
  the public transport system operates.
- System information used to describe the characteristics
  of the public transport system such as modes, operators and wait curves.
- Service or line data, defining the characteristics of
  the lines and nodes traversed.
- Nontransit legs, presenting opportunities to access the
  public transport system, egress from it and transfer between services during
  the course of a trip. Nontransit legs may be determined externally and/or
  generated by Public Transport under user control.
- Control information for route enumeration and
  evaluation.

Modeling

You can use the Public Transport program to model public
transport. The model has several parts:

- [Route enumeration and evaluation](GUID-332F64D8-374C-4A69-AA7B-84F52496347F.html#GUID-332F64D8-374C-4A69-AA7B-84F52496347F__ROUTEENUMERATION)
- [Skimming (levels of service matrices)](GUID-332F64D8-374C-4A69-AA7B-84F52496347F.html#GUID-332F64D8-374C-4A69-AA7B-84F52496347F__SKIMMING)
- [Loading (assignment)](GUID-332F64D8-374C-4A69-AA7B-84F52496347F.html#GUID-332F64D8-374C-4A69-AA7B-84F52496347F__LOADING)
- [Reporting](GUID-332F64D8-374C-4A69-AA7B-84F52496347F.html#GUID-332F64D8-374C-4A69-AA7B-84F52496347F__REPORTING)

Route enumeration and
evaluation

During route enumeration and evaluation, the Public
Transport model finds "reasonable" or "attractive" multiple discrete routes
between zones, considering:

- Number of transfers
- Spread — the margin of cost over the minimum cost route
- Nontransit and in-vehicle costs
- Boarding and transfer penalties by mode
- Waiting time, derived from the combined frequency of
  services at stop nodes
- Fares (considered only for evaluation)

Skimming (levels of service
matrices)

During skimming, the Public Transport model skims
(extracts) the costs—and the components of costs—of journeys between zones.
These costs are suitable for model validation, demand modeling, scheme
evaluation, loading demand on the network and producing operational statistics
like passenger miles, hours and revenue. The model can extract the following
skims:

- Composite costs
- Value of choice
- Average, perceived, and actual trip costs and
  components (that is, nontransit, in-vehicle and wait times, boarding and
  transfer penalties, fares)
- Best trip cost

The model can extract network-wide trip costs, or the model
can stratify them, where appropriate, by modes.

Loading (assignment)

During loading, the Public Transport model loads demand, in
the form of trips between zone pairs. The model uses a series of models at the
different decision points in a trip:

- The walk-choice model allocates trips between
  attractive choices at access, egress, and transfer points. Where walk and
  transit choices are available, it also determines the transit share.
- The service-frequency or the service-frequency-and-cost
  model allocates the transit share at a stop between the attractive services
  available at that stop.
- The alternative-alighting model apportions the share of
  a service to the attractive alternative alighting points of that service.

(Strictly, these models determine the probability of use of
the alternative routes; trips are then loaded on the routes based upon these
probabilities.)

Two forms of loading are supported, multirouting and
best-path. The best-path method does not use walk or alighting choice models,
and loads demand using the service-frequency model.

Reporting

During reporting, the Public Transport model produces
reports you can use to analyze different aspects of passenger loadings:

- Passenger transfers between all modes
- Passenger transfers between public transport modes
- Passenger transfers between operators
- A variety of stop-to-stop movements

Heuristic
Process

The Public Transport modeling algorithm implements a
sequence of rules (network simplification > minimum path > enumeration
> evaluation (decision points probabilistic models > combination of
probabilities at the different decision points) / iterative route evaluation
step in case of crowding) to find an "approximate/feasible solution" close to
the optimal solution. This approach can be defined an heuristic process.

It is therefore important that once the model is defined in
terms of the system, lines and parameters, this fundamental structure of the
Public Transport model is kept consistent with the analysis that needs to be
undertaken in different scenarios. The results from the model could be
sensitive to major changes in the inputs due to the heuristics in network
simplification, route enumeration and evaluation.

This consistency between the base scenarios and the
forecasting scenarios is a general rule that should be followed, referring to
the attributes coded to describe the Public Transport model (modes numbering
system, etc.). In particular, the line ordering should be defined in the base
scenario, and the model should be calibrated accordingly. This line ordering,
consolidated in the base scenario, should be kept consistent in forecasting
scenarios, whilst new lines should be added at the end of the line file or in a
new line file.

Terminology

This document uses the following sets of terms
interchangeably:

- "transit" and "public transport". In particular,
  "transit" is used in this document to describe a type of link over which a
  public transport service can run, namely "transit link" as opposed to
  "nontransit link".
- "lines" and "services"
- "transfers" and "interchanges"
- "skims" and "levels of service"
- "generalized cost" and "generalized time"
- "origin-destination pairs", "zone pairs", "OD pairs",
  and "IJ pairs"
- "nontransit time" and "walk time"
- "loading" and "assignment"
- "volume", "load", "flow", and "passenger flow"

**Parent topic:**  [Public Transport](GUID-A90E32B1-BFB1-40F1-A921-7BC202F0A562.html)

|
|  |
|
|  |
