# Control Statements

This section describes the control statements for CUBE
Cluster:

- [DISTRIBUTE](GUID-ED7A19AF-8C6C-4532-982E-1A47FCA6A53C.html#GUID-ED7A19AF-8C6C-4532-982E-1A47FCA6A53C__LI_BC956507D652466890CE8FB87522502A)
- [DISTRIBUTEMULTISTEP](GUID-ED7A19AF-8C6C-4532-982E-1A47FCA6A53C.html#GUID-ED7A19AF-8C6C-4532-982E-1A47FCA6A53C__LI_21021BAE91644BCEB6E3497E868BAACD)
- [ENDDISTRIBUTEMULTISTEP](GUID-ED7A19AF-8C6C-4532-982E-1A47FCA6A53C.html#GUID-ED7A19AF-8C6C-4532-982E-1A47FCA6A53C__LI_C7F712EE4B38402D84A9E56724F78C36)
- [WAIT4FILES](GUID-ED7A19AF-8C6C-4532-982E-1A47FCA6A53C.html#GUID-ED7A19AF-8C6C-4532-982E-1A47FCA6A53C__LI_859A98A4A49641F4973457D622EBFD65)
- [DISTRIBUTEINTRASTEP](GUID-ED7A19AF-8C6C-4532-982E-1A47FCA6A53C.html#GUID-ED7A19AF-8C6C-4532-982E-1A47FCA6A53C__LI_3B7C09AEC37640BC81485462118F9ED7)

DISTRIBUTE

The DISTRIBUTE statement globally controls the DP options to
turn on/off intrastep or multistep distribute processing.

DISTRIBUTE Keywords

- MULTISTEP - |?| - Global
  MULTISTEP DP on/off
- INTRASTEP - |?| - Global
  INTRASTEP DP on/off

DISTRIBUTEMULTISTEP

Invoke multistep distributed processing.

DISTRIBUTEMULTISTEP
Keywords

- PROCESSID - |S| - Prefix for the
  file names used to communicate with the sub-processes. In addition to a string
  constant, a Pilot string variable can be used to set the ProcessID by putting
  it within @ characters (for example, ProcessID=@MyID@).
- PROCESSNUM - |I| - Single process
  number since the steps are distributed to one process only. In addition to a
  single numeric constant, a Pilot numeric variable can also be used to set the
  process number dynamically (for example, ProcessNum=MyProcess).
- COMMPATH - |S| - Common path for
  checking for availability of processors. Defaults to null (working directory
  used).

  The common path is only used for initial communication
  with the node. The node switches its work directory to be the same as the main
  process before running the multistep (or intrastep) distributed process. After
  completing the steps, the node reverts to waiting for the communication file in
  the
  COMMPATH directory.

  This will work regardless of the location of the script
  file and the work directory of the main process. Nodes can be waiting in the
  COMMPATH directory, then when a model run
  requests the node it will switch to the work directory for that particular
  model and run the steps. When it is done, it will go back and wait for further
  commands in the
  COMMPATH directory.

ENDDISTRIBUTEMULTISTEP

Statement to end current MULTISTEP subprocess.

WAIT4FILES

When a block of operations is distributed to another
computer, the main computer will continue running the script without waiting
for the sub-process to finish. It is the user’s responsibility to check for
sub-process completion before using output files generated by the sub-process.
When a sub-process is done, it will create a {ProcessID}{Process#}.script.end
file. Use the Wait4Files command in the Pilot program to wait for the .end file
to be created.

WAIT4FILES
Keywords

- FILES - |S| - Specifies a list
  of all the files to wait for. In addition to a string constant, a Pilot string
  variable can be used to set the file names by putting it within @ characters
  (for example, Files=@MyFile@).

  The variable can be a comma-separated list of files
  with no spaces; for example:

  ```
  MYFILES=’Node1.script.end,Node2.script.end’
   
  Wait4Files Files=@MYFILES@, CheckReturnCode=T, DelDistribFiles=T
  ```
- CHECKRETURNCODE - |?| -
  Specifies if the return codes from the sub- processes should be checked. When
  true, the whole run will stop if a sub-process returns with a code 2 (fatal) or
  higher.
- DELDISTRIBFILES - |?| - Controls
  the disposition of the MDP temporary communication files. The default is true,
  meaning to remove all temporary files.
- PRINTFILES - |S| - Controls the
  disposition of the print files from the sub-processes. It can be "MERGE,"
  "MERGESAVE," "DELETE," or "SAVE." MERGE means the print files will be merged
  back into the main print file then deleted. MERGESAVE means to merge the files
  but not delete them. DELETE means no merge but delete them and SAVE means no
  merge but save them. The default is SAVE.
- UPDATEVARS
  - |S| - Specifies a list of global variables computed in
  Pilot and logged from individual programs that should be merged back from the
  sub- process run. Any variables with the first part of the name matching an
  UpdateVars name will be merged back. For example, for
  UpdateVars=vname,Matrix.xname, variable vname1,vnameabc,Matrix.xnamevar etc.
  will all be merged back to the main process.

DISTRIBUTEINTRASTEP

Programs: Matrix, Highway

Invoke intrastep distributed processing. Currently only
available in Matrix and Highway.

DISTRIBUTEINTRASTEP
Keywords

- COMMPATH - |S| - Common path for
  checking for availability of processors. Defaults to null (working directory
  used).
- MINGROUPSIZE - |I| - Minimum
  distributed zone group size. If there are more sub-processes than there are
  zone groups of this size, then some sub-processes will not be used. For
  example, if there are 100 zones and MinGroupSize is 20 and ProcessList=1-10,
  only 4 sub-processes will be used to process 20 zones each and the main process
  will process 20 zones itself.
- PROCESSID - |S| - The ProcessID
  is the prefix for the file names used to communicate with the sub-processes.
- PROCESSLIST - |I| - List of
  sub-processes to use for DP. It is a list of numbers and put in as individual
  numbers or ranges (for example, ProcessList=1,5,10-20,25). Each sub-process
  must be assigned a unique process number.
- SAVEPRN
  - |?| - Switch to control if the sub-process print files
  should be saved or not.

**Parent topic:** [CUBE Cluster](GUID-413908B0-27A9-4741-AD3D-477817641737.html)

|
|  |
|
|  |
