# Introduction to TRNBUILD

Transit processing is similar to highway-network processing,
but more complex. During transit processing, the program must form a transit
network and develop paths between zones. The program uses paths to extract
level-of-service (LOS) data, which mode- choice models use (in a separate
process). The program also uses paths to assign trips to the network. When
developing paths for transit processing, the program must consider mode
transfers, mode weighting, and line combinations—a more complex process than
path development for highway processing.

A transit network contains lines and support links. Lines
are user- defined transit routes. Support links—nontransit links that provide
connectivity between different transit lines and between zone centroids and
lines—are necessary to support the transit system. Types of support links
include walk, park-and-ride, and transfer. The program requires a background
highway network as the starting point for support links and lines. The highway
network provides the location of nodes, and basic information about distance
and highway travel. For transit lines that do not use separate guideways, such
as buses, the program computes the line’s speed as some function of the highway
distances and speeds on the links used.

Every support link and every transit line must have a mode
number. Mode numbers can range from 1 to 255. The program treats modes assigned
to transit lines as transit modes and treats all other modes as support modes.
You may assign mode numbers as desired, but if the program detects any support
links with a mode used by a transit line, the program will terminate with a
fatal error message. Bentley recommends that you set a standard for defining
modes and use that standard consistently.

Support links can use the distances from any related highway
links, but usually the program computes support-link travel times with a
separate process. You must enter support links with control statements.
Traditionally, the program uses support links to model people walking to, from,
and between transit stop nodes, and for driving from zones to transit.
TRNBUIILD has no predefined specifications of support links and their modes.
For maximum flexibility, Bentley recommends assigning separate modes for the
following categories:

- Walk from zone to another mode
- Walk to zone from another mode
- Drive from zone to another mode
- General walking

You might prefer to funnel all access to and from rail
stations through links of certain modes (usually walk, transit, and drive).
This requires saving three modes for these access links. You might prefer to
further stratify transit access by grouping some transit modes.

With properly structured data, you can easily change mode
assignment. When defining support links, you can assign modes. TRNBUILD allows
you to assign a global value for modes, and to change the global setting before
reading various line records. However, global values are not compatible with
transit-network editing in CUBE Base. Therefore, Bentley recommends that you
not use global values.

The program has a built-in process to generate zonal access
support links automatically. That process builds traditional paths using the
highway-link distances and the walk speed to find the best path from each of
the selected zone centroids to each of the transit stops within a designated
distance. The program generates a support link from the zone to each stop
reached within the specified distance. You can vary the distance by mode, and
can limit the number of links by mode. The program can generate links from a
zone, to a zone, or from a zone and to a zone. The program assigns modes
globally. If the program uses a special highway network, you can also restrict
the number of highway links that paths traverse. You can also provide access
links that cause the program to develop the path from the zone to the link’s
A-node, rather than from the zone to a stop node at the link’s B-node. You must
initiate zonal access with the
[ZONEACCESS](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__ZONEACCESS) control statement.

[PNR](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__PNR) control statements trigger a similar built-in process
to generate drive-access support links. PNR access development differs from
zonal access development. If you code PNR node as a link, the program considers
the first node to be the PNR node, and generates an additional lot link between
the two nodes. Only the zones explicitly defined with the PNR node can access
the node. The program will generate an access link from each specified zone
that is within the specified distance of the PNR node. You can enter the
generated links as either one- or two-way; usually you will code drive-access
links as one-way. The program develops the zone-to- PNR-node link using a
minimum-time path-development process. These processes only use the links in
the highway network. Specifying the maximum-time parameter can reduce the path
development time. You cannot suppress this access development process if there
are
[PNR](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__PNR) control statements in the input.

Path Building

The program builds transit paths using a special algorithm,
which is similar to highway path building. When building highway paths, the
program develops a path set for an origin zone, and then extracts individual
zone-to-zone paths. Transit path building has considerably more variables than
traditional highway path building. Rather than simply developing the single
best path between two zones, TRNBUILD allows you to invoke many factors at
various points in the process.

The algorithm determines the best path to each node. Because
there may be restrictions (usually mode oriented) out of the node, the program
must keep the best path into each node for each active mode at the node. This
requires considerable computer resources. Though the algorithm can develop
paths by saving just the single best path into a node, this method may not
obtain true minimum paths if there are mode-change factors or prohibitions.
Saving the single best path will reduce path-development time by about sixty
percent. The PATHSTYLE parameter sets the alternate option (see
[PARAMETERS](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__PARAMETERS_unique_8)).

Usually, you input transit-line data in some period-specific
basis, which may be inconsistent with the processed period. For example, you
might include a line with a 90-minute headway in an analysis for a 60-minute
period. Because the program is not time specific, the program does not know how
many times the line is available at a particular stop node during the process:
one time or two times? Instead, the program assumes that any line is available
at any of its stop nodes.

Traditionally, a line’s wait time is calculated as one-half
of its headway. However, most travelers are somewhat knowledgeable about what
time they can board the line. Therefore, you might invoke a maximum initial
wait time, IWAITMAX. For example, a 60- minute line would normally have a
30-minute wait time. But when the line is the first in a trip, you might cap
the wait time. To ensure that wait time accounts for boarding time, you can
also set a minimum wait time, IWAITMIN. Similarly, for transferring passengers,
the transit system likely offers some synchronization and the wait time may
differ from the traditional wait time. You can specify maximum and minimum wait
times at transfer points with XWAITMAX and XWAITMIN.

TRNBUILD also allows you to factor times on various
segments of a trip, creating perceived times that differ from actual times. The
program applies these perceived factors based on modes, wait time, and
transfers. The program builds paths based on perceived times. Before choosing a
path segment, the program converts the actual time to perceived time based on
the action considered. As the path moves from one segment to another, the modes
of the from- and to-segments determine how the program processes the path. The
program considers a segment to be either a support link or a contiguous portion
of a transit line. In most cases, segment connections have some associated
perceived time. Boardings occur when accessing a transit segment; transfers
occur at any boarding other than a path’s initial boarding.

During segment-to-segment processing, the program adds a
value to the path time; it can be zero. The program obtains the added value
from the XPEN and XPENFAC arrays, depending upon the segment modes (see
[FACTOR](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__FACTOR)). The program considers the
XPEN value to be an actual value, which is
modified during path selection by the XPENFAC factor to
obtain a perceived value. The values are mode-to-mode specific, and include all
modes. You can prevent certain mode-to-mode combinations with NOX factor
switches. The program computes the perceived segment time by multiplying the
actual segment time by the segment’s MODEFAC factor. If the to-segment is
transit, the program also multiplies the wait time by the XWAITFAC factor and
possibly adds a boarding penalty, BOARDPEN. You can use the boarding penalty to
add larger perceived values to the path time as the number of boardings
increases, discouraging excessive transit boardings.

In basic mode, the program works with only the set of best
paths between two zones (I-J). For some zone combinations, there are other
reasonable possibilities. However, considering all possibilities would take an
inordinate amount of computer resources. TRNBUILD has an option to calculate
additional path sets based on the accesses at the zones. Specify this option
with a
[MULTIACCESS](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__MULTIACCESS) control statement. With this option, the
program builds a path set from every outbound link at zone I and considers all
the access links at J for each path to J. Thus, if zone I has four outbound
links and zone J has four inbound links, the program might consider up to
sixteen paths between I and J. During assignment, the program compares each of
the I-J possibilities to the best path between the zones, and considers only
those that fall within the
MULTIACCESS specifications. Those specifications
define time differences, specified as both actual minutes and relative time.
For example, if
MULTIACCESS MAXTIMEDIFF=3, MAXPCTDIFF=10,
then the assignment program will use any I-J path that is within 3 minutes, or
10 percent, of the best I-J path.

The program uses all the selected paths in assignment. The
program allocates trips to the paths according to the relative times of the
paths. Specifying
MULTIACCESS for an application without assignment
has no effect on results. However, if an application traces paths, the trace
will show the various paths that would be used during assignment. Note that the
multiaccess process does not necessarily create a good spread for the
assignment. The spread depends on the access links at a zone. For example, if
three outbound access links connect to the same line, the spread may be only
between the access links. If there is another access link to another line, that
link might get a smaller share because the program spreads the trips across the
four links. The multiaccess process increases path-building time because the
process must build more paths.

TRNBUILD
line-combining process

The line-combining process selects the path from a node when
travelers can choose from more than one line to reach a specific downstream
node. TRNBUILD’s line-combining process combines only lines with the same mode.

When there are several lines of the same mode that can take
a passenger from a particular node to the same downstream node and those lines
have different headways or different run times, TRNBUILD considers perceived
times and completes the following steps:

1. Select the best line, based on the total time (sum of
   wait time and run time) between the two points on each line.
2. Save lines that have a total time within the mode’s
   [COMBINE](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__COMBINE_unique_1)
   criteria.
3. Compute combined wait time by dividing the total number
   of vehicles available per hour into sixty minutes, and dividing by two.

In many cases, the run times for the lines vary, so a
method must be employed to compute a weight for each line’s run time.

It would seem that the average run time could be used, but
there are scenarios where this could result in rather strange values. A typical
scenario would be at a station where there are numerous local lines (low
headways) that run at slow speeds, and an occasional express line (high
headway) that runs at a high speed.

A new wait time is computed for each line by subtracting
the best run time from the line’s total time. These new wait times are used to
compute an equivalent headway, which in turn, is used to compute an estimated
combined wait time. Each line’s run time is given a weight based upon the ratio
of the estimated wait time to its new wait time. The total run time is weighted
sum of all the line run times.

There is no guarantee that the process will always result in
a combined total time that is less than the best path for every situation. But,
the process is reasonable in most situations.

To illustrate the process, define the following terms:

- Actual value (A) — Determine directly from line links
  and frequencies (that is, the actual link time or the actual waiting time to
  board).
- Perceived value (P) — Compute by factoring actual value
  by an appropriate weighting factor
- Arun — Actual run time
- Await — Actual wait time (headway/2). This value is
  restricted by the wait factors (IWAITMIN, IWAITMAX, XWAITMIN, and XWAITMAX)
- Prun — Perceived run time (Arun \* ModeFac)
- Pwait — Perceived wait time (Await \* WaitFac)
- Ptt — Perceived travel time (Prun + Pwait)
- B(arg) — Best value of arg

A list of all the lines and their corresponding Ptt to reach
the node from this node is obtained. The line with the lowest Ptt is considered
as the best line. All other lines are then evaluated to determine if they
should be combined with the best line. A line will be combined with the best
line if its Ptt does not exceed the sum of the B(Ptt) + MaxDiff, or, if there
is a COMBINE IF expression which is satisfied for the line.

After the program obtains a list of the lines to be
combined, it determines how the trips will be distributed among the lines. A
revised perceived wait time for each line is computed as the difference between
the line’s Ptt and the B(Prun). Each line is given a weight based upon its
revised wait time relative to the other lines’ revised wait times.

The perceived path wait time is computed as one half the
headway based upon vehicles available and factored by the appropriate wait
factor. ( (60 / VehAvail / 2) \* WAITFAC). The perceived path run time is the
sum of (weight \* perceived run time) for all lines.

Example: Assume the following conditions for an initial
boarding between a node pair, and MaxDiff = 10.00:

```
IWAITMAX=8 IWAITMIN=2 MODEFAC=1.2 IWAITFAC=2.5
Line Freq Run Pwait Prun Ett RWait Wt Rtime
A 10 22 12.50 26.40 38.90 26.90 .291 7.69
B 15 15 18.75 18.00 36.75 24.75 .317 5.70
C 20 10 20.00 12.00 32.00 20.00 .392 4.70
D 60 23 20.00 27.60 47.60 Not combined
```

Perceived Path Values: Wait= 5.45 Rtime= 18.09

Trip matrix
processing

TRNBUILD can assign trips from a trip matrix to the paths.
When using a trip matrix, the program does not build path sets for origin zones
without trips. This can reduce computation time considerably. If there are any
trips for any of the I-J pairs selected (explicitly or implicitly), the program
generates the path set, but only processes the selected I-J pairs with trips.
If the assignment option is true, the program assigns trips to the appropriate
I-J paths. The program accumulates link volumes and node boardings and exits.
You can requests several types of reports showing assignment results.

See
[FILEI](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__FILEI_unique_6)

Level-of-service
extraction

You can obtain zone-to-zone values for various elements of
the I-J paths. These elements include times, distance, first and last transit
nodes, access and first transit modes, number-of-boardings, and fares. You can
extract most elements by mode, or combinations of modes. You can combine
elements with user expressions. If the program traces an I-J pair, the trace
includes a list of its basic elements. The transit running times and distances
may be not exact for the transit legs where the path is split amongst several
lines. In those segments, the extracted element is the sum of (line weight \*
network value) for all lines in the segment.

See
[FILEO](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__FILEO_unique_7).

If the you specify the FILEO MATO
keyword, the program writes the extracted values in matrix format to the
specified file. See also
[MULTIACCESS](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__MULTIACCESS).

Output network

This version of TRNBUILD does not write an explicit transit
network. The program can write a DBF file containing the nodes and links, and
you can use the file with CUBE Base.

You can reduce the number of links in the output file by
restricting the modes to be included. The TRNBUILD network will automatically
include all the nodes in a transit line. However, an option lets you restrict
the output to only stop-to-stop links (omitting the intermediate non-stop
nodes). If an assignment is made, the file will contain link volumes,
boardings, and exits at each link’s nodes. See also
[FILEO](GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52.html#GUID-A5F2107A-D48C-4B47-8C3C-8C0FB610DE52__FILEO_unique_7).

**Parent topic:** [TRNBUILD
program](GUID-C2CBB4E1-D0A0-480D-AD04-E66622416C75.html)

|
|  |
|
|  |
