# Introduction to the Network program

Network is a utility program for processing highway
networks. The program can process up to ten input networks simultaneously, and
can generate one output network. The program can read input network files of
various formats: ASCII records, standard database in dBASE style (DBF), CUBE
geodatabase networks, or any CUBE Voyager, TP+, MINUTP, Tranplan, or TRIPS
binary network format. The program generates a data record for each unique node
and each link found in any of the input files. For a valid node record, the
Network program requires a node variable, named N. For a valid link record, the
Network program requires an A-node, named A, and a B-node, named B. Each A-node
and B-node must exist on a node record. To open, view, and edit the network in
CUBE Graphics, the node records must also have two additional variables, named
X and Y, that represent the X- and Y-coordinates of each node. The program
processes each of these records using logic that you can control. You can
summarize and report on the processed data.

Node and link records in a given data file need not be
unique. Use the
 [COMBINE](GUID-57CABDC5-C6B1-4B85-8499-6F4A7D4CFE3E.html#GUID-57CABDC5-C6B1-4B85-8499-6F4A7D4CFE3E__COMBINE) subkeyword with the LINKI and NODEI keywords under
the
 [FILEI](GUID-57CABDC5-C6B1-4B85-8499-6F4A7D4CFE3E.html#GUID-57CABDC5-C6B1-4B85-8499-6F4A7D4CFE3E__FILEI_unique_3) statement to specify how to combine values of fields
with redundant data records. NETWORK also features the
 [GEOMI](GUID-57CABDC5-C6B1-4B85-8499-6F4A7D4CFE3E.html#GUID-57CABDC5-C6B1-4B85-8499-6F4A7D4CFE3E__GEOMI) keyword to read link geometry sources from shapefiles
and geodatabases.

Upon detecting a Tranplan network as input, the program
immediately writes it in CUBE Voyager format to a temporary file, and then uses
that file in place of the original file for subsequent processing. (Note: CUBE
Voyager treats a FSUTMS network as a standard Tranplan network. No auxiliary
files will be open. Only CUBE deals with FSUTMS networks differently.)

If you specify an output network, the program writes a file
in a proprietary (CUBE Voyager or MINUTP) binary format. It is a network
database that contains speed/capacity information, node records, and link
records. In MINUTP networks, the node information consists solely of
coordinates for each node. In a CUBE Voyager or TP+ network, there may be any
number of items for nodes. Optionally, a file of link records and/or a file of
node records may be written in either ASCII or DBF format. Beginning with
version 5.0, output networks may be a CUBE Voyager custom network feature
class, stored in an ESRI custom geodatabase. See the description for the
 [FORMAT](GUID-57CABDC5-C6B1-4B85-8499-6F4A7D4CFE3E.html#GUID-57CABDC5-C6B1-4B85-8499-6F4A7D4CFE3E__NETOFORMAT) subkeywords under
 [NETO](GUID-57CABDC5-C6B1-4B85-8499-6F4A7D4CFE3E.html#GUID-57CABDC5-C6B1-4B85-8499-6F4A7D4CFE3E__NETO_unique_1) keyword for the FILEO
statement for information on specifying output networks to a CUBE Voyager
custom feature class network in a geodatabase file.

Subsequent topics discuss:

- [Built-in variables](GUID-5AF1421D-6629-4614-820B-514AF97CEEDA.html#GUID-5AF1421D-6629-4614-820B-514AF97CEEDA__BUILTINVARIABLES_unique_1)
- [Built-in functions](GUID-5AF1421D-6629-4614-820B-514AF97CEEDA.html#GUID-5AF1421D-6629-4614-820B-514AF97CEEDA__BUILTINFUNCTIONS_unique_1)

Built-in
variables

- A-
  Node number of a link's A node.
- B-
  Node number of a link's B node.
- GEOMETRYSOURCE-
  Defines the input file index number that controls the source of the geometry to
  be applied to the output
   [NETO](GUID-57CABDC5-C6B1-4B85-8499-6F4A7D4CFE3E.html#GUID-57CABDC5-C6B1-4B85-8499-6F4A7D4CFE3E__NETO_unique_1) or
   [LINKO](GUID-57CABDC5-C6B1-4B85-8499-6F4A7D4CFE3E.html#GUID-57CABDC5-C6B1-4B85-8499-6F4A7D4CFE3E__LINKO) file when multiple input networks are specified.The
  Network program may take up to ten input networks. These ten networks can be
  any of the supported binary formats, CUBE geodatabase networks, GIS shapefiles
  (for
   [GEOMI](GUID-57CABDC5-C6B1-4B85-8499-6F4A7D4CFE3E.html#GUID-57CABDC5-C6B1-4B85-8499-6F4A7D4CFE3E__GEOMI) only), or combinations of link and node files in
  ASCII, DBF, or MDB formats. When specifying an output network to a CUBE
  geodatabase network or LINKOshape file, GEOMETRYSOURCEspecifies which # from
  the
  FILEI [LINKI](GUID-57CABDC5-C6B1-4B85-8499-6F4A7D4CFE3E.html#GUID-57CABDC5-C6B1-4B85-8499-6F4A7D4CFE3E__LINKI)[#]= or
  FILEI [GEOMI](GUID-57CABDC5-C6B1-4B85-8499-6F4A7D4CFE3E.html#GUID-57CABDC5-C6B1-4B85-8499-6F4A7D4CFE3E__GEOMI)[#]=specifications provides the geometry to be
  applied to the output geodatabase network. Each input network coming from a
  geodatabase network will have a field called
  GEOMETRYSOURCE. This field's value is the index of the input file
  (3 for LINKI[3], for example). Other input formats could also have a field
  called GEOMETRYSOURCE defined by the user. The value of the GEOMETRYSOURCE
  field in the output network dictates the source of the link geometry. By
  default, the value is taken from the first available value from all the input
  networks. So if LINKI[1] is a binary network without a GEOMETRYSOURCE field and
  LINKI[2] is a geodatabase network, the output GEOMETRYSOURCE field will have a
  value of 2 (unless there is no record in LINKI[2] for a certain link). If
  MERGE [RECORD](GUID-57CABDC5-C6B1-4B85-8499-6F4A7D4CFE3E.html#GUID-57CABDC5-C6B1-4B85-8499-6F4A7D4CFE3E__MRECORD)=T, records that are merged from other LINKIs retain
  their GEOMETRYSOURCE value. Therefore, the output network could have a mix of
  GEOMETRYSOURCE values. In addition, you can specifically set the value in a
  script based on other attributes in the various input networks (for example,
  downtown use LINKI[3], and other areas use LINKI[2]).Please refer to
   [GEOMI](GUID-57CABDC5-C6B1-4B85-8499-6F4A7D4CFE3E.html#GUID-57CABDC5-C6B1-4B85-8499-6F4A7D4CFE3E__GEOMI) for additional usage requirements specific to that
  keyword and its indices.
- N-
  Node number of the node.
- X-
  X-coordinate value of a node.
- Y-
  Y-coordinate value of a node.
- \_COMPARE-
  Stores a return code value resulting from the COMPARE statement.
- \_ZONES- Holds
  the number of zones read from the input network as set by the ZONES parameter.

Built-in
functions

- SPEEDFOR(lanes,spdclass)
  - Returns the speed from the SPEED table for the designated number of lanes and
  spdclass.
- CAPACITYFOR(lanes,capclass)
  - Returns the capacity times the lanes for the designated number of lanes and
  spdclass.
- CHECKNAME(Name)
  - Check if a link attribute exists. If it does not exist, the function returns
  a zero. If it exists, the return code is a 2 digit number in the format of
  {t}{s}, defined as follows:

  {t} is type

  0=single variable

  1=vector

  2=user function

  3=work matrices

  4=user function

  5=user function

  6=vector with constant index and no default index

  7=multidimension array, no default index

  {s} is storage size

  1=numeric size

  2=string

  e.g. 1=numeric variable, 2=string variable, 11=numeric array,
  12=string array
- GETVALUE(Name {,
  DefaultValue}) - Get a numeric value from a link attribute. This function is
  used along with the CheckName function. CheckName checks the existence of a
  link attribute and GetValue extracts the value from it. They are used to avoid
  model run crash due to non-existence or invalid value of a link attribute in
  the input files. Users can specify a default value in case of any invalid
  values. For example:

  ```
  IF(CHECKNAME('LI.1.LANES')>0)
  		  _Im=GETVALUE('LI.1.LANES') 
  ENDIF		
  ```

**Parent topic:**  [Network Program](GUID-7B7F2E2B-1D37-43F4-B390-965753B42391.html)

|
|  |
|
|  |
