# Connecting to a CUBE Database with the CubeDatabase class

When working with CUBE databases, the CubeDatabase class
needs to be used. We call an instance of the class, so that a connection to a
datastore is opened within CubeDatabase. The class will "register" the
datastore as a CubeDatabase object, and this registration creates metadata
within the datastore for use by the CubeAPI.

```
source_db = "input/cube7_networks/Cubetown.SQLite"
db = cp.CubeDatabase(source_db, False)
```

The first argument is the connection string with path and
name of the CUBE database, whilst the second argument is the Boolean "create".
When create=False, the database will not be created is it does not exist. In
case the source\_db is not a valid path, the "Connection failed" error will be
returned. "False" is the default.

Several methods are now available to investigate and
manipulate the data stored in the database. For example, the below statement
will return a tuple with the network names stored in the CUBE database
(instance called "db" above).

```
network_names = db.networkNames()
```

Returning a Python tuple like the below, for an example with
two networks.

`('net_name_1', 'net_name_2')`

The items in the list of network names can be extracted from
their index, for example, the first one is extracted and stored in a new
variable called "first\_network\_name" as below.

```
first_network_name = network_names[0]
```

**Parent topic:** [Application of the
Network API with CubePy](GUID-9F45BDF7-8305-4D84-94DB-596D532D93A1.html)

|
|  |
|
|  |
