# Control Statements

Most of the standard Matrix program statements are valid in
the Generation program, and a few additional ones are available. Since the
Generation program is a subset of the Matrix program, it is assumed that the
user is familiar with the Matrix control statement set. Only the differences
between the Matrix and Generation control statements are included in this
section. For descriptions of other control statements see
[Control Statements](GUID-62A32849-2DC3-47F3-AD9D-839A756C1557.html#GUID-62A32849-2DC3-47F3-AD9D-839A756C1557).

Matrix statements not allowed in Generation:

- [FREQUENCY](GUID-62A32849-2DC3-47F3-AD9D-839A756C1557.html#GUID-62A32849-2DC3-47F3-AD9D-839A756C1557__LI_CAB5B779415C4228B01F6C8D69185BCB)
- [PRINTROW](GUID-62A32849-2DC3-47F3-AD9D-839A756C1557.html#GUID-62A32849-2DC3-47F3-AD9D-839A756C1557__PRINTROW_unique_2)
- [RENUMBER](GUID-62A32849-2DC3-47F3-AD9D-839A756C1557.html#GUID-62A32849-2DC3-47F3-AD9D-839A756C1557__RENUMBER)

Matrix keywords not allowed in Generation:

- [FILEI](GUID-62A32849-2DC3-47F3-AD9D-839A756C1557.html#GUID-62A32849-2DC3-47F3-AD9D-839A756C1557__FILEI_unique_4) MATI=
- [FILEO](GUID-62A32849-2DC3-47F3-AD9D-839A756C1557.html#GUID-62A32849-2DC3-47F3-AD9D-839A756C1557__FILEO_unique_4) MATO=
- [COMP](GUID-62A32849-2DC3-47F3-AD9D-839A756C1557.html#GUID-62A32849-2DC3-47F3-AD9D-839A756C1557__COMP_unique_4)MW=
- [PARAMETERS](GUID-62A32849-2DC3-47F3-AD9D-839A756C1557.html#GUID-62A32849-2DC3-47F3-AD9D-839A756C1557__PARAMETERS_unique_4) MAXMW=
- [REPORT](GUID-62A32849-2DC3-47F3-AD9D-839A756C1557.html#GUID-62A32849-2DC3-47F3-AD9D-839A756C1557__REPORT_unique_4) MARGINS= MARGINREC=

Generation statements not in Matrix:

- [PROCESS … ENDPROCESS](GUID-82EE797F-DA66-4615-B43D-58280751AD2F.html#GUID-82EE797F-DA66-4615-B43D-58280751AD2F__PROCESS_unique_2)PHASE=
- [BALANCE](GUID-82EE797F-DA66-4615-B43D-58280751AD2F.html#GUID-82EE797F-DA66-4615-B43D-58280751AD2F__BALANCE) A2P= P2A= NHB= Generation keywords not in Matrix:
- [FILEO](GUID-82EE797F-DA66-4615-B43D-58280751AD2F.html#GUID-82EE797F-DA66-4615-B43D-58280751AD2F__FILEO_unique_5)PAO=
- [COMP](GUID-82EE797F-DA66-4615-B43D-58280751AD2F.html#GUID-82EE797F-DA66-4615-B43D-58280751AD2F__COMP_unique_5) A= P=
- [PARAMETERS](GUID-82EE797F-DA66-4615-B43D-58280751AD2F.html#GUID-82EE797F-DA66-4615-B43D-58280751AD2F__PARAMETERS_unique_5)MAXPURPS=
- [REPORT](GUID-82EE797F-DA66-4615-B43D-58280751AD2F.html#GUID-82EE797F-DA66-4615-B43D-58280751AD2F__REPORT_unique_5)PC= AC= P= A=

BALANCE

This statement is used to specify how the trip ends are to
be adjusted in the Phase=Adjust process. Keywords include:

- [A2P](GUID-82EE797F-DA66-4615-B43D-58280751AD2F.html#GUID-82EE797F-DA66-4615-B43D-58280751AD2F__A2P)=list
- [NHB](GUID-82EE797F-DA66-4615-B43D-58280751AD2F.html#GUID-82EE797F-DA66-4615-B43D-58280751AD2F__NHB)=list
- [P2A](GUID-82EE797F-DA66-4615-B43D-58280751AD2F.html#GUID-82EE797F-DA66-4615-B43D-58280751AD2F__P2A)=list

This statement makes the adjustment process much simpler.
Typically, most users adjust the Attraction totals to match the Production
Totals.

BALANCE Keywords

- A2P - |IP| - Specifies
  the purposes whose attraction totals are to be set to the production totals for
  that purpose.
- NHB
  - |IP| - Specifies the purposes whose attraction totals
  are to be set to the production totals for that purpose, and then the
  productions are set equal to the attractions for each zone.
- P2A - |IP| - Specifies the purposes whose
  production totals are to be set to the attraction totals for that purpose.

Example

```
BALANCE A2P=1,2,4-7 NHB=3
```

COMP

Computes a variable, P/A row, or P/A row element. Keywords
include:

- VAR=expression (see Matrix
   [COMP](GUID-62A32849-2DC3-47F3-AD9D-839A756C1557.html#GUID-62A32849-2DC3-47F3-AD9D-839A756C1557__COMP_unique_4))
- [A](GUID-82EE797F-DA66-4615-B43D-58280751AD2F.html#GUID-82EE797F-DA66-4615-B43D-58280751AD2F__A_unique_1)[n][I]=expression
- [P](GUID-82EE797F-DA66-4615-B43D-58280751AD2F.html#GUID-82EE797F-DA66-4615-B43D-58280751AD2F__P_unique_1)[n][I]=expression
- INCLUDE (see Matrix
   [COMP](GUID-62A32849-2DC3-47F3-AD9D-839A756C1557.html#GUID-62A32849-2DC3-47F3-AD9D-839A756C1557__COMP_unique_4))
- EXCLUDE (see Matrix
   [COMP](GUID-62A32849-2DC3-47F3-AD9D-839A756C1557.html#GUID-62A32849-2DC3-47F3-AD9D-839A756C1557__COMP_unique_4))

The
COMP statement is probably the most important of
all the statements in the program. It is used to compute variable and P and A
array values. The reader is advised to read "[Introduction to
Generation program](GUID-43B399AD-6406-4FBB-AF78-17B8A23885EF.html)" for information concerning the differences in array
computation within the ILOOP and ADJUST phases. The major difference between
the Generation and Matrix programs for
COMP statements is in the use of P/A[] and MW[].
First of all, MW[] is not valid in the Generation program. Secondly, COMP P[]=,
A[]=, and MW[]= expressions automatically imply a loop based upon J from 1 to
zones in the Matrix program. While in the Generation program, when P[]= or A[]=
is specified in the ILOOP phase, the J loops from I to I (a single iteration).
Within the ADJUST phase, the J loops from 1 to zones. See
 [COMP](GUID-62A32849-2DC3-47F3-AD9D-839A756C1557.html#GUID-62A32849-2DC3-47F3-AD9D-839A756C1557__COMP_unique_4) for details of
COMP
statements.

The
COMP statement may contain
INCLUDE and
EXCLUDE to cause selective processing.

COMP Keywords

- A[n][I] - |N| - Causes the
  program to solve the expression for each value of J. The result is stored in
  A[n][I]. If the second [] is not specified, it will default to I.
- P[n][I] - |N| - Causes
  the program to solve the expression for each value of J. The result is stored
  in P[n][I]. If the second [] is not specified, it will default to I.

Expressions may contain the functions
ATOT(#) and
PTOT(#), which return the attraction and
production totals for purpose #.

Example

```
COMP P[1]= ZI.1.P1
COMP A[2]=0.90*ahbo
IF (I=38-49) P[1]=ZI.4.SPECIAL
```

FILEO

Generates trip-end records. Keywords and subkeywords
include:

- [PAO](GUID-82EE797F-DA66-4615-B43D-58280751AD2F.html#GUID-82EE797F-DA66-4615-B43D-58280751AD2F__PAO)

  - [CFORM](GUID-82EE797F-DA66-4615-B43D-58280751AD2F.html#GUID-82EE797F-DA66-4615-B43D-58280751AD2F__CFORM_unique_1)
  - [DBF](GUID-82EE797F-DA66-4615-B43D-58280751AD2F.html#GUID-82EE797F-DA66-4615-B43D-58280751AD2F__DBF)
  - [FORM](GUID-82EE797F-DA66-4615-B43D-58280751AD2F.html#GUID-82EE797F-DA66-4615-B43D-58280751AD2F__FORM_unique_1)
  - [LIST](GUID-82EE797F-DA66-4615-B43D-58280751AD2F.html#GUID-82EE797F-DA66-4615-B43D-58280751AD2F__LIST_unique_1)
  - [NAMES](GUID-82EE797F-DA66-4615-B43D-58280751AD2F.html#GUID-82EE797F-DA66-4615-B43D-58280751AD2F__NAMES)
  - [PRINT](GUID-82EE797F-DA66-4615-B43D-58280751AD2F.html#GUID-82EE797F-DA66-4615-B43D-58280751AD2F__PRINT_unique_5)

The PAO keyword is used to request that a file containing
trip end records be written at the end of all stack processing. There may be
multiple PAO specifications; each one should reference a different file. They
will be processed in the order in which they appear in the input stream. The
flexibility of the statement can allow records to be written in almost any
format that other software systems might require. Within CUBE Voyager, the most
likely place where this data would be read would be in any program that accepts
ZDATI files; usually it should be written in a format such that the
Distribution process can read it as the distribution trip ends. Although other
data can be placed on these records, normally, the records should contain only
the zone number (I), and the various trip ends such as P[1], a[1], etc.

For consistency, the PAO processing uses the CUBE Voyager
General PRINT control statement processor. The PRINT processor is called one
time for each zone in a loop where Z=1-Zones. The major difference between PAO
and PRINT statement is that PAO specifies the output file by definition, and
the FILE keyword is not allowed. Full documentation about the sub-keywords can
be found in
[PRINT](GUID-0776F0F6-CB16-4D4F-8AC6-CFABFE50B531.html#GUID-0776F0F6-CB16-4D4F-8AC6-CFABFE50B531__PRINT).

PAO can be optionally written as a DBF by setting DBF=T or
to an MDB by designating the output MDB file name followed by a backslash and
the element name.

FILEO Keywords

- PAO - |KF10| - Name of
  a file where the formatted records are to be written.
- PAO -
  CFORM - |S| - Format for following string list
  items. Normally, text variables will not be written to a
  PAO file.
- PAO -
  DBF - |?| - Indicates if the output records
  are to written as a DBF file. This is off, unless turned on. If DBF=T is
  specified, the user may optionally name the variables to be written to the DBF
  records with the NAMES subkeyword. A maximum of 100 variables may be designated
  for single DBF.

  If the PAO keyword specifies an MDB file for the
  output, then DBF subkeyword should either not be specified or set to T. If
  DBF=F and PAO specifies an MDB file the program will fail.
- PAO -
  FORM - |S| - Format for following numerical
  list items. FORM=20.2SLR is recommended if the Distribution program is going to
  read the file.
- PAO -
  LIST - |S| - List of items to be formatted
  into the output buffer. P and A must be indexed; the zone index is
  automatically supplied as Z. In most cases, the only variables in the list will
  be Z, and expressions of P[n] and A[n] values. If any expressions are used,
  they should be enclosed within parenthesis, and should not contain any spaces
  or commas.
- PAO -
  NAMES - |S| - Names to be assigned to the DBF
  variables. The names are positional (their indices refer to the positional
  location of the variables in the LIST). For example:

  ```
  LIST=z,p1,p2,p3,a1,a2,a3,
  DBF=T,NAMES=TAZ, WORKPROD, OTHERPROD,NHBPROD
  ```

  would set the names in the DBF for z,p1,p2,p3,
  respectively. Likewise:

  ```
  NAMES[5]=WORKATTR, OTHERATTR, NHBATTR
  ```

  would set the names for a1,a2,a3.

  A name may not exceed 10 characters; it will be
  truncated, if designated as longer than 10. The routine does not check for
  duplicate names. Extraneous
  NAMES
  (that is, NAMES[11] in this example), are ignored. If
  there is no name specified for a variable, the program will use the variable
  name directly. If the
  LIST field is an expression, the program will
  use the first 10 alphanumeric digits, ignoring other characters. For example
  (VAR1+VAR2+VAR3) will be named VAR1VAR2VA.
- PAO -
  PRINT - |?| - Indicates if the output records
  are to also be listed to the standard output. This is off, unless turned on.

Example

```
PAO = OUTPUT.DAT, FORM=8.0,
LIST = Z(2) P[1] P[2] P[3] P[4] P[5] A[1] A[2] A[3] A[4] A[5] PRINT=N
PAO[2] = OUTPUT2.DAT, FORM=SL, Z P[1] A[1] P[2] A[2] (P[3]+P[4])
(A[3]+A[4])
```

PARAMETERS

Set general parameters. Keywords include:

- [MAXPURPS](GUID-5729E92A-F968-AD19-C3BD-68E2177C9A27)
- [ZONES](GUID-BD56C167-B160-6622-D9DF-3DBE2F52E5B9)

PARAMETERS Keywords

- MAXPURPS - |I| -
  Sets the number of P and A arrays to be allocated, and establishes an index
  boundary for P and A in
  COMP
  statements. The maximum value is 20, which the program
  defaults to, if the keyword is not specified. Setting this to a more realistic
  value will cause a less drain on computer memory.
- ZONES - |I| -
  Establishes the number of zones to process. If
  ZONES is not specified, and the program has no
  other way to identify the appropriate number of zones, it will be set to 100.

Example

```
ZONES=3000 MAXPURPS=5
```

PROCESS

Establishes phase blocks. Keywords include:

- [PHASE](GUID-82EE797F-DA66-4615-B43D-58280751AD2F.html#GUID-82EE797F-DA66-4615-B43D-58280751AD2F__PHASE_unique_1)
- [ENDPHASE](GUID-82EE797F-DA66-4615-B43D-58280751AD2F.html#GUID-82EE797F-DA66-4615-B43D-58280751AD2F__ENDPHASE)

A user process phase stack is defined by a
PROCESS statement that designates its beginning
and an
ENDPROCESS statement that designates its ending.
To simplify coding, the PROCESS control word is not
necessary; PHASE=name may be used directly. And, to further simplify coding,
the
ENDPROCESS statement is not necessary; the
occurrence of another
PROCESS statement acts as the
ENDPROCESS statement. If
ENDPROCESS is used, it may be coded as either
ENDPROCESS or
ENDPHASE. In the Generation program, normally,
only the
PHASE=ADJUST statement is all that is needed to
differentiate between the normal
ILOOP statements and the
ADJUST statements that are used to balance the
final Ps and As.

PROCESS Keywords

- PHASE - |KS| - Names
  the phase stack. The control statements that follow it, until an
  ENDPROCESS statement or another
  PROCESS statement is encountered, will be
  executed when the phase is internally executed. Exception: Static statements,
  such as
  PARAMETERS, FILEI, FILEO, LOOKUP, are not
  processed as stack statements, even if they are located within a phase block.
  The following
  PHASE names may be specified:

  - ILOOP
  - ADJUST
- ENDPHASE - |K| -
  Defines the end of the user control statements for a stack.

Example

```
RUN PGM=GENERATION .
P[1]=....
.
.
PHASE=ADJUST
; the following statements are used to balance Ps and As
RUN PGM=GENERATION
.
PHASE=ILOOP
P[1]=....
.
PHASE=ADJUST
; the following statements are used to balance Ps and As
```

REPORT

Requests reports and establishes tracing. Keywords include:

- [AC](GUID-82EE797F-DA66-4615-B43D-58280751AD2F.html#GUID-82EE797F-DA66-4615-B43D-58280751AD2F__REPORTAC)
- [A](GUID-82EE797F-DA66-4615-B43D-58280751AD2F.html#GUID-82EE797F-DA66-4615-B43D-58280751AD2F__REPORTA)
- [PC](GUID-82EE797F-DA66-4615-B43D-58280751AD2F.html#GUID-82EE797F-DA66-4615-B43D-58280751AD2F__REPORTPC)
- [P](GUID-82EE797F-DA66-4615-B43D-58280751AD2F.html#GUID-82EE797F-DA66-4615-B43D-58280751AD2F__REPORTP)
- [TRACE](GUID-82EE797F-DA66-4615-B43D-58280751AD2F.html#GUID-82EE797F-DA66-4615-B43D-58280751AD2F__REPORTTRACE)

REPORT Keywords

- AC - |?| - Requests
  that the computed attractions be reported. This report precedes
  ADJUST processing.
- A
  - |?| - Requests that the final attractions be reported.
  This report follows any
  ADJUST processing.
- PC - |?| - Requests
  that the computed productions be reported. This report precedes
  ADJUST processing.
- P - |?| - Requests
  that the final productions be reported. This report follows any
  ADJUST
  processing.
- TRACE - |K?| -
  Controls the listing of the stack statements as they are processed.

Example

```
REPORT AC=y A=y P=y
```

**Parent topic:** [Generation](GUID-54C1F1F6-DC14-4546-A9BB-34882ACBE6C7.html)

|
|  |
|
|  |
